# Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism

V. I. Lenin



## pref01

Lenin: 1916/imp-hsc: PREFACE

    
    
    
    

    
    
  

  
    Vladimir Ilyich Lenin

    Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism

    A POPULAR OUTLINE

    

    PREFACE

    The pamphlet here presented to the reader was written in the spring of 1916, in Zurich. In the conditions in which I was obliged to work there I naturally suffered somewhat from a shortage of French and English literature and from a serious dearth of Russian literature. However, I made use of the principal English work on imperialism, the book by J. A. Hobson, with all the care that, in my opinion, that work deserves.

    This pamphlet was written with an eye to the tsarist censorship. Hence, I was not only forced to confine myself strictly to an exclusively theoretical, specifically economic analysis of facts, but to formulate the few necessary observations on politics with extreme caution, by hints, in an allegorical language—in that accursed Aesopian language—to which tsarism compelled all revolutionaries to have recourse whenever they took up the pen to write a "legal" work.

    It is painful, in these days of liberty, to re-read the passages of the pamphlet which have been distorted, cramped, compressed in an iron vice on account of the censor. That the period of imperialism is the eve of the socialist revolution; that social-chauvinism (socialism in words, chauvinism in deeds) is the utter betrayal of socialism, complete desertion to the side of the bourgeoisie; that this split in the working-class movement is bound up with the objective conditions of imperialism, etc.—on these matters I had to speak in a "slavish" tongue, and I must refer the reader who is interested in the subject to the articles I wrote abroad in 1914-17, a new edition of which is soon to appear. In order to show the reader, in a guise acceptable to the censors, how shamelessly untruthful the capitalists and the social-chauvinists who have deserted to their side (and whom Kautsky opposes so inconsistently) are on the question of annexations; in order to show how shamelessly they screen the annexations of their capitalists, I was forced to quote as an example—Japan! The careful reader will easily substitute Russia for Japan, and Finland, Poland, Courland, the Ukraine, Khiva, Bokhara, Estonia or other regions peopled by non-Great Russians, for Korea.

    I trust that this pamphlet will help the reader to understand the fundamental economic question, that of the economic essence of imperialism, for unless this is studied, it will be impossible to understand and appraise modern war and modern politics.

    Author

    Petrograd, April 26, 1917

    
    

    
      
        
        |
        PREFACE TO THE FRENCH AND GERMAN EDITIONS
      

      
        Document Index
      
    
    

    
      
        < Backwards
        
        Forwards >
      

      
        Works Index
        |
        Volume 22
        |
        Collected Works
        |
        L.I.A. Index


## pref02

Lenin: 1916/imp-hsc: PREFACE TO THE FRENCH AND GERMAN EDITIONS

    
    
    
    

    
    
  

  
    Vladimir Ilyich Lenin

    Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism

    A POPULAR OUTLINE

    

    
      PREFACE TO THE FRENCH AND GERMAN EDITIONS[1]
    

    I

    As was indicated in the preface to the Russian edition, this pamphlet was written in 1916, with an eye to the tsarist censorship. I am unable to revise the whole text at the present time, nor, perhaps, would this be advisable, since the main purpose of the book was, and remains, to present, on the basis of the summarised returns of irrefutable bourgeois statistics, and the admissions of bourgeois scholars of all countries, a composite picture of the world capitalist system in its international relationships at the beginning of the twentieth century—on the eve of the first world imperialist war.

    To a certain extent it will even be useful for many Communists in advanced capitalist countries to convince themselves by the example of this pamphlet, legal from the standpoint of the tsarist censor, of the possibility, and necessity, of making use of even the slight remnants of legality which still remain at the disposal of the Communists, say, in contemporary America or France, after the recent almost wholesale arrests of Communists, in order to explain the utter falsity of social-pacifist views and hopes for "world democracy". The most essential of what should be added to this censored pamphlet I shall try to present in this preface.

    II

    It is proved in the pamphlet that the war of 1914-18 was imperialist (that is, an annexationist, predatory war of plunder) on the part of both sides; it was a war for the division of the world, for the partition and repartition of colonies and spheres of influence of finance capital, etc.

    Proof of what was the true social, or rather, the true class character of the war is naturally to be found, not in the diplomatic history of the war, but in an analysis of the objective position of the ruling classes in all the belligerent countries. In order to depict this objective position one must not take examples or isolated data (in view of the extreme complexity of the phenomena of social life it is always possible to select any number of examples or separate data to prove any proposition), but all the data on the basis of economic life in all the belligerent countries and the whole world.

    It is precisely irrefutable summarised data of this kind that I quoted in describing the partition of the world in 1876 and 1914 (in Chapter VI) and the division of the world's railways in 1890 and 1913 (in Chapter VII). Railways are a summation of the basic capitalist industries, coal, iron and steel; a summation and the most striking index of the development of world trade and bourgeois-democratic civilisation. How the railways are linked up with large-scale industry, with monopolies, syndicates, cartels, trusts, banks and the financial oligarchy is shown in the preceding chapters of the book. The uneven distribution of the railways, their uneven development—sums up, as it were, modern monopolist capitalism on a world-wide scale. And this summary proves that imperialist wars are absolutely inevitable under such an economic system, as long as private property in the means of production exists.

    The building of railways seems to be a simple, natural, democratic, cultural and civilising enterprise; that is what it is in the opinion of the bourgeois professors who are paid to depict capitalist slavery in bright colours, and in the opinion of petty-bourgeois philistines. But as a matter of fact the capitalist threads, which in thousands of different intercrossings bind these enterprises with private property in the means of production in general, have converted this railway construction into an instrument for oppressing a thousand million people (in the colonies and semicolonies), that is, more than half the population of the globe that inhabits the dependent countries, as well as the wage-slaves of capital in the "civilised" countries.

    Private property based on the labour of the small proprietor, free competition, democracy, all the catchwords with which the capitalists and their press deceive the workers and the peasants are things of the distant past. Capitalism has grown into a world system of colonial oppression and of the financial strangulation of the overwhelming majority of the population of the world by a handful of "advanced" countries. And this "booty" is shared between two or three powerful world plunderers armed to the teeth (America, Great Britain, Japan), who are drawing the whole world into their war over the division of their booty.

    III

    The Treaty of Brest-Litovsk dictated by monarchist Germany, and the subsequent much more brutal and despicable Treaty of Versailles dictated by the "democratic" republics of America and France and also by "free" Britain, have rendered a most useful service to humanity by exposing both imperialism's hired coolies of the pen and petty-bourgeois reactionaries who, although they call themselves pacifists and socialists, sang praises to "Wilsonism," and insisted that peace and reforms were possible under imperialism.

    The tens of millions of dead and maimed left by the war—a war to decide whether the British or German group of financial plunderers is to receive the most booty—and those two "peace treaties," are with unprecedented rapidity opening the eyes of the millions and tens of millions of people who are downtrodden, oppressed, deceived and duped by the bourgeoisie. Thus, out of the universal ruin caused by the war a world-wide revolutionary crisis is arising which, however prolonged and arduous its stages may be, cannot end otherwise than in a proletarian revolution and in its victory.

    The Basle Manifesto of the Second International, which in 1912 gave an appraisal of the very war that broke out in 1914 and not of war in general (there are different kinds of wars, including revolutionary wars)—this Manifesto is now a monument exposing to the full the shameful bankruptcy and treachery of the heroes of the Second International.

    That is why I reproduce this Manifesto (This Manifesto is not given as an appendix to this edition—Ed) as a supplement to the present edition, and again and again I urge the reader to note that the heroes of the Second International are as assiduously avoiding the passages of this Manifesto which speak precisely, clearly and definitely of the connection between that impending war and the proletarian revolution, as a thief avoids the scene of his crime.

    IV

    Special attention has been devoted in this pamphlet to a criticism of Kautskyism, the international ideological trend represented in all countries of the world by the "most prominent theoreticians," the leaders of the Second International (Otto Bauer and Co. in Austria, Ramsay MacDonald and others in Britain, Albert Thomas in France, etc., etc.) and a multitude of socialists, reformists, pacifists, bourgeois democrats and parsons.

    This ideological trend is, on the one hand, a product of the disintegration and decay of the Second International, and, on the other hand, the inevitable fruit of the ideology of the petty bourgeoisie, whose entire way of life holds them captive to bourgeois and democratic prejudices.

    The views held by Kautsky and his like are a complete renunciation of those same revolutionary principles of Marxism that writer has championed for decades, especially, by the way, in his struggle against socialist opportunism (of Bernstein, Millerand, Hyndman, Gompers, etc.). It is not a mere accident, therefore, that Kautsky's followers all over the world have now united in practical politics with the extreme opportunists (through the Second, or Yellow International) and with the bourgeois governments (through bourgeois coalition governments in which socialists take part).

    The growing world proletarian revolutionary movement in general, and the communist movement in particular, cannot dispense with an analysis and exposure of the theoretical errors of Kautskyism. The more so since pacifism and "democracy" in general, which lay no claim to Marxism whatever, but which, like Kautsky and Co., are obscuring the profundity of the contradictions of imperialism and the inevitable revolutionary crisis to which it gives rise, are still very widespread all over the world. To combat these tendencies is the bounden duty of the party of the proletariat, which must win away from the bourgeoisie the small proprietors who are duped by them, and the millions of working people who enjoy more or less petty-bourgeois conditions of life.

    V

    A few words must be said about Chapter VIII, "Parasitism and Decay of Capitalism." As already pointed out in the text, Hilferding, ex-"Marxist," and now a comrade-in-arms of Kautsky and one of the chief exponents of bourgeois, reformist policy in the  Independent Social-Democratic Party of Germany,[2] has taken a step backward on this question compared with the frankly pacifist and reformist Englishman, Hobson. The international split of the entire working-class movement is now quite evident (the Second and the Third Internationals). The fact that armed struggle and civil war is now raging between the two trends is also evident—the support given to Kolchak and Denikin in Russia by the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries against the Bolsheviks; the fight the Scheidemanns and Noskes have conducted in conjunction with the bourgeoisie against the Spartacists[3] in Germany; the same thing in Finland, Poland, Hungary, etc. What is the economic basis of this world-historical phenomenon?

    It is precisely the parasitism and decay of capitalism, characteristic of its highest historical stage of development, i.e., imperialism. As this pamphlet shows, capitalism has now singled out a handful (less than one-tenth of the inhabitants of the globe; less than one-fifth at a most "generous" and liberal calculation) of exceptionally rich and powerful states which plunder the whole world simply by "clipping coupons." Capital exports yield an income of eight to ten thousand million francs per annum, at pre-war prices and according to pre-war bourgeois statistics. Now, of course, they yield much more.

    Obviously, out of such enormous superprofits (since they are obtained over and above the profits which capitalists squeeze out of the workers of their "own" country) it is possible to bribe the labour leaders and the upper stratum of the labour aristocracy. And that is just what the capitalists of the "advanced" countries are doing: they are bribing them in a thousand different ways, direct and indirect, overt and covert.

    This stratum of workers-turned-bourgeois, or the labour aristocracy, who are quite philistine in their mode of life, in the size of their earnings and in their entire outlook, is the principal prop of the Second International, and in our days, the principal social (not military) prop of the bourgeoisie. For they are the real agents of the bourgeoisie in the working-class movement, the labour lieutenants of the capitalist class, real vehicles of reformism and chauvinism. In the civil war between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie they inevitably, and in no small numbers, take the side of the bourgeoisie, the "Versaillese" against the "Communards."

    Unless the economic roots of this phenomenon are understood and its political and social significance is appreciated, not a step can be taken toward the solution of the practical problem of the communist movement and of the impending social revolution.

    Imperialism is the eve of the social revolution of the proletariat. This has been confirmed since 1917 on a world-wide scale.

    N. Lenin 

    July 6, 1920

    

    During the last fifteen to twenty years, especially since the Spanish-American War (1898) and the Anglo-Boer War (1899–1902), the economic and also the political literature of the two hemispheres has more and more often adopted the term "imperialism" in order to describe the present era. In 1902, a book by the English economist J. A. Hobson, Imperialism, was published in London and New York. This author, whose point of view is that of bourgeois social-reformism and pacifism which, in essence, is identical with the present point of view of the ex-Marxist, Karl Kautsky, gives a very good and comprehensive description of the principal specific economic and political features of imperialism. In 1910, there appeared in Vienna the work of the Austrian Marxist, Rudolf Hilferding, Finance Capital (Russian edition, Moscow, 1912). In spite of the mistake the author makes on the theory of money, and in spite of a certain inclination on his part to reconcile Marxism with opportunism, this work gives a very valuable theoretical analysis of "the latest phase of capitalist development," as the subtitle runs. Indeed, what has been said of imperialism during the last few years, especially in an enormous number of magazine and newspaper articles, and also in the resolutions, for example, of the  Chemnitz and Basle congresses which took place in the autumn of 1912, has scarcely gone beyond the ideas expounded, or more exactly, summed up by the two writers mentioned above...

    Later on, I shall try to show briefly, and as simply as possible, the connection and relationships between the principal economic features of imperialism. I shall not be able to deal with the non-economic aspects of the question, however much they deserve to be dealt with. References to literature and other notes which, perhaps, would not interest all readers, are to be found at the end of this pamphlet.[4]

    

    Notes

    [1]This preface was first published under the title “Imperialism and Capitalism” in Communist International No. 18, dated October, 1921.

    [2] A Centrist party set up at an inaugural congress at Gotha in April 1917. Owing to the revolutionary upswing, which was greatly intensified by the bourgeois-democratic revolution in Russia in February 1917, the opportunist leadership of the Social-Democratic Party of Germany was losing ground among the rank and file. To overcome their discontent, divert attention from the revolutionary struggle and prevent the establishment of a revolutionary working-class party, the Centrist leaders tried to set up a party which would give them continued control of the masses. It was intended to make the Independent Social-Democratic Party of Germany such a party. The Independents used Centrist phrases to cover up their call for unity with the social-chauvinists and desertion of the class struggle. The bulk of the party consisted of the Kautskyite Labour Commonwealth. 
 
 The Spartacus group remained in the party for a time but was organisationally and politically independent, continuing its illegal work and struggle to rid the masses of the influence of Centrist leaders. In 1918, the Spartacus League withdrew from the Independent Party and became the core of the Communist Party of Germany.

 In October 1920, a split took place at the congress in Halle. In December 1920, a considerable part of the Independent S.D. Party merged with the Communist Party of Germany. The Right- wing elements formed a separate party and took the old name of I.S.D.P.G., which existed until 1922.

    [3] The Spartacists—members of a revolutionary organisation of German Left-wing Social-Democrats; formed in January 1916 under the leadership of Karl Liebknecht, Rosa Luxemburg, Franz Mehring, Clara Zetkin, J. Marchlewski, L. Jogiches (Tyszka) and Wilhelm Pieck. In April 1915, Luxemburg and Mehring founded Die Internationale, a magazine which rallied the main group of the Leftwing Social-Democrats of Germany. From 1916, the Internationale group, apart from the political leaflets they had been printing since 1915, began the illegal publication and circulation of Political Letters which were signed Spartacus (issued regularly until October 1918); this gave the group its name of Spartacus League. They conducted revolutionary propaganda among the masses, organised massive anti-war action, led strikes, exposed the imperialist nature of the world war and the treachery of the opportunist Social-Democratic leaders. But they made serious theoretical and political mistakes: they denied the possibility of national liberation wars in the imperialist epoch, they took an inconsistent stand on the slogan of turning the imperialist war into a civil war, underestimated the role of the proletarian party as the vanguard of the working class, underestimated the peasantry as the ally of the proletariat and were afraid to break with the opportunists. Lenin repeatedly criticised their mistakes (see “The Junius Pamphlet”, “A Caricature of Marxism and ‘Imperialist Economism’”, etc.).

 In April 1917, the Spartacus League joined the Centrist I.S.D.P.G. (see Note 82), but remained organisationally independent. During the revolution in Germany in November 1918, they issued their own programme (December 14) and broke with the Independents. On December 30, 1918-January 1, 1919, they founded the Communist Party of Germany.

    [4] In the present edition, the author’s references and notes are given as footnotes.

    
      
        PREFACE
        |
        I. CONCENTRATION OF PRODUCTION AND MONOPOLIES
      

      
        Document Index
      
    
    

    
      
        < Backwards
        
        Forwards >
      

      
        Works Index
        |
        Volume 22
        |
        Collected Works
        |
        L.I.A. Index


## ch01

Lenin: 1916/imp-hsc: I. CONCENTRATION OF PRODUCTION AND MONOPOLIES

    
    
    
    

    

    
  

  
    Vladimir Ilyich Lenin

    Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism

    A POPULAR OUTLINE

    

    I. CONCENTRATION OF PRODUCTION AND MONOPOLIES

    The enormous growth of industry and the remarkably rapid concentration of production in ever-larger enterprises are one of the most characteristic features of capitalism. Modern production censuses give most complete and most exact data on this process.

    In Germany, for example, out of every 1,000 industrial enterprises, large enterprises, i.e., those employing more than 50 workers, numbered three in 1882, six in 1895 and nine in 1907; and out of every 100 workers employed, this group of enterprises employed 22, 30 and 37, respectively. Concentration of production, however, is much more intense than the concentration of workers, since labour in the large enterprises is much more productive. This is shown by the figures on steam-engines and electric motors. If we take what in Germany is called industry in the broad sense of the term, that is, including commerce, transport, etc., we get the following picture. Large-scale enterprises, 30,588 out of a total of 3,265,623, that is to say, 0.9 per cent. These enterprises employ 5,700,000 workers out of a total of 14,400,000, i.e., 39.4 per cent; they use 6,600,000 steam horse power out of a total of 8,800,000, i.e., 75.3 per cent, and 1,200,000 kilowatts of electricity out of a total of 1,500,000, i.e., 77.2 per cent.

    Less than one-hundredth of the total number of enterprises utilise more than three-fourths of the total amount of steam and electric power! Two million nine hundred and seventy thousand small enterprises (employing up to five workers), constituting 91 per cent of the total, utilise only 7 per cent of the total amount of steam and electric power! Tens of thousands of huge enterprises are everything; millions of small ones are nothing.

    In 1907, there were in Germany 586 establishments employing one thousand and more workers, nearly one-tenth (1,380,000) of the total number of workers employed in industry, and they consumed almost one-third (32 per cent) of the total amount of steam and electric power.[1] As we shall see, money capital and the banks make this superiority of a handful of the largest enterprises still more overwhelming, in the most literal sense of the word, i.e., millions of small, medium and even some big "proprietors" are in fact in complete subjection to some hundreds of millionaire financiers.

    In another advanced country of modern capitalism, the United States of America, the growth of the concentration of production is still greater. Here statistics single out industry in the narrow sense of the word and classify enterprises according to the value of their annual output. In 1904 large-scale enterprises with an output valued at one million dollars and over, numbered 1,900 (out of 216,180, i.e., 0.9 per cent). These employed 1,400,000 workers (out of 5,500,000, i.e., 25.6 per cent) and the value of their output amounted to $5,600,000,000 (out of $14,800,000,000, i.e., 38 per cent). Five years later, in 1909, the corresponding figures were: 3,060 enterprises (out of 268,491, i.e., 1.1 per cent) employing 2,000,000 workers (out of 6,600,000, i.e., 30.5 per cent) with an output valued at $9,000,000,000 (out of $20,700,000,000, i.e., 43.8 per cent). [2]

    Almost half the total production of all the enterprises of the country was carried on by one-hundredth part of these enterprises! These 3,000 giant enterprises embrace 258 branches of industry. From this it can be seen that at a certain stage of its development concentration itself, as it were, leads straight to monopoly, for a score or so of giant enterprises can easily arrive at an agreement, and on the other hand, the hindrance to competition, the tendency towards monopoly, arises from the huge size of the enterprises. This transformation of competition into monopoly is one of the most important—if not the most important—phenomena of modern capitalist economy, and we must deal with it in greater detail. But first we must clear up one possible misunderstanding.

    American statistics speak of 3,000 giant enterprises in 250 branches of industry, as if there were only a dozen enterprises of the largest scale for each branch of industry.

    But this is not the case. Not in every branch of industry are there large-scale enterprises; and moreover, a very important feature of capitalism in its highest stage of development is so-called combination of production, that is to say, the grouping in a single enterprise of different branches of industry, which either represent the consecutive stages in the processing of raw materials (for example, the smelting of iron ore into pig-iron, the conversion of pig-iron into steel, and then, perhaps, the manufacture of steel goods)—or are auxiliary to one another (for example, the utilisation of scrap, or of by-products, the manufacture of packing materials, etc.).

    "Combination," writes Hilferding, "levels out the fluctuations of trade and therefore assures to the combined enterprises a more stable rate of profit. Secondly, combination has the effect of eliminating trade. Thirdly, it has the effect of rendering possible technical improvements, and, consequently, the acquisition of superprofits over and above those obtained by the 'pure' (i.e,, non-combined) enterprises. Fourthly, it strengthens the position of the combined enterprises relative to the 'pure' enterprises, strengthens them in the competitive struggle in periods of serious depression, when the fall in prices of raw materials does not keep pace with the fall in prices of manufactured goods."[3]

    The German bourgeois economist, Heymann, who has written a book especially on "mixed," that is, combined, enterprises in the German iron industry, says: "Pure enterprises perish, they are crushed between the high price of raw material and the low price of the finished product." Thus we get the following picture: "There remain, on the one hand, the big coal companies, producing millions of tons yearly, strongly organised in their coal syndicate, and on the other, the big steel plants, closely allied to the coal mines, having their own steel syndicate. These giant enterprises, producing 400,000 tons of steel per annum, with a tremendous output of ore and coal and producing finished steel goods, employing 10,000 workers quartered in company houses, and sometimes owning their own railways and ports, are the typical representatives of the German iron and steel industry. And concentration goes on further and further. Individual enterprises are becoming larger and larger. An ever-increasing number of enterprises in one, or in several different industries, join together in giant enterprises, backed up and directed by half a dozen big Berlin banks. In relation to the German mining industry, the truth of the teachings of Karl Marx on concentration is definitely proved; true, this applies to a country where industry is protected by tariffs and freight rates. The German mining industry is ripe for expropriation."[4]

    Such is the conclusion which a bourgeois economist who, by way of exception, is conscientious, had to arrive at. It must be noted that he seems to place Germany in a special category because her industries are protected by higher tariffs. But this is a circumstance which only accelerates concentration and the formation of monopolist manufacturers' associations, cartels, syndicates, etc. It is extremely important to note that in free-trade Britain, concentration also leads to monopoly, although somewhat later and perhaps in another form. Professor Hermann Levy, in his special work of research entitled Monopolies, Cartels and Trusts, based on data on British economic development, writes as follows:

    "In Great Britain it is the size of the enterprise and its high technical level which harbour a monopolist tendency. This, for one thing, is due to the great investment of capital per enterprise, which gives rise to increasing demands for new capital for the new enterprises and thereby renders their launching more difficult. Moreover (and this seems to us to be the more important point), every new enterprise that wants to keep pace with the gigantic enterprises that have been formed by concentration would here produce such an enormous quantity of surplus goods that it could dispose of them only by being able to sell them profitably as a result of an enormous increase in demand; otherwise, this surplus would force prices down to a level that would be unprofitable both for the new enterprise and for the monopoly combines." Britain differs from other countries where protective tariffs facilitate the formation of cartels in that monopolist manufacturers' associations, cartels and trusts arise in the majority of cases only when the number of the chief competing enterprises has been reduced to "a couple of dozen or so." "Here the influence of concentration on the formation of large industrial monopolies in a whole sphere of industry stands out with crystal clarity."[5]

    Half a century ago, when Marx was writing Capital, free competition appeared to the overwhelming majority of economists to be a "natural law". Official science tried, by a conspiracy of silence, to kill the works of Marx, who by a theoretical and historical analysis of capitalism had proved that free competition gives rise to the concentration of production, which, in turn, at a certain stage of development, leads to monopoly. Today, monopoly has become a fact. Economists are writing mountains of books in which they describe the diverse manifestations of monopoly, and continue to declare in chorus that "Marxism is refuted." But facts are stubborn things, as the English proverb says, and they have to be reckoned with, whether we like it or not. The facts show that differences between capitalist countries, e.g., in the matter of protection or free trade, only give rise to insignificant variations in the form of monopolies or in the moment of their appearance; and that the rise of monopolies, as the result of the concentration of production, is a general and fundamental law of the present stage of development of capitalism.

    For Europe, the time when the new capitalism definitely superseded the old can be established with fair precision; it was the beginning of the twentieth century. In one of the latest compilations on the history of the "formation of monopolies", we read:

    "Isolated examples of capitalist monopoly could be cited from the period preceding 1860; in these could be discerned the embryo of the forms that are so common today; but all this undoubtedly represents the prehistory of the cartels. The real beginning of modern monopoly goes back, at the earliest, to the sixties. The first important period of development of monopoly commenced with the international industrial depression of the seventies and lasted until the beginning of the nineties." "If we examine the question on a European scale, we will find that the development of free competition reached its apex in the sixties and seventies. It was then that Britain completed the construction of her old-style capitalist organisation. In Germany, this organisation had entered into a fierce struggle with handicraft and domestic industry, and had begun to create for itself its own forms of existence."

    "The great revolution commenced with the crash of 1873, or rather, the depression which followed it and which, with hardly discernible interruptions in the early eighties, and the unusually violent, but short-lived boom round about 1889, marks twenty-two years of European economic history ... .. During the short boom of 1889-90, the system of cartels was widely resorted to in order to take advantage of favourable business conditions. An ill-considered policy drove prices up still more rapidly and still higher than would have been the case if there had been no cartels, and nearly all these cartels perished ingloriously in the smash. Another five-year period of bad trade and low prices followed, but a new spirit reigned in industry; the depression was no longer regarded as something to be taken for granted: it was regarded as nothing more than a pause before another boom.

    "The cartel movement entered its second epoch: instead of being a transitory phenomenon, the cartels have become one of the foundations of economic life. They are winning one field of industry after another, primarily, the raw materials industry. At the beginning of the nineties the cartel system had already acquired in the organisation of the coke syndicate on the model of which the coal syndicate was later formed—a cartel technique which has hardly been improved on. For the first time the great boom at the close of the nineteenth century and the crisis of 1900-03 occurred entirely—in the mining and iron industries at least—under the aegis of the cartels. And while at that time it appeared to be something novel, now the general public takes it for granted that large spheres of economic life have been, as a general rule, removed from the realm of free competition."[6]

    Thus, the principal stages in the history of monopolies are the following: (1) 1860-70, the highest stage, the apex of development of free competition; monopoly is in the barely discernible, embryonic stage. (2) After the crisis of 1873, a lengthy period of development of cartels; but they are still the exception. They are not yet durable. They are still a transitory phenomenon. (3) The boom at the end of the nineteenth century and the crisis of 1900-03. Cartels become one of the foundations of the whole of economic life. Capitalism has been transformed into imperialism.

    Cartels come to an agreement on the terms of sale, dates of payment, etc. They divide the markets among themselves. They fix the quantity of goods to be produced. They fix prices. They divide the profits among the various enterprises, etc.

    The number of cartels in Germany was estimated at about 250 in 1896 and at 385 in 1905, with about 12,000 firms participating.[7] But it is generally recognised that these figures are underestimations. From the statistics of German industry for 1907 we quoted above, it is evident that even these 12,000 very big enterprises probably consume more than half the steam and electric power used in the country. In the United States of America, the number of trusts in 1900 was estimated at 185 and in 1907, 250. American statistics divide all industrial enterprises into those belonging to individuals, to private firms or to corporations. The latter in 1904 comprised 23.6 per cent, and in 1909, 25.9 per cent, i.e., more than one-fourth of the total industrial enterprises in the country. These employed in 1904, 70.6 per cent, and in 1909, 75.6 per cent, i.e., more than three-fourths of the total wage-earners. Their output at these two dates was valued at $10,900,000,000 and $16,300,000,000, i.e., 73.7 per cent and 79.0 per cent of the total, respectively.

    At times cartels and trusts concentrate in their hands seven- or eight-tenths of the total output of a given branch of industry. The Rhine-Westphalian Coal Syndicate, at its foundation in 1893, concentrated 86.7 per cent of the total coal output of the area, and in 1910 it already concentrated 95.4 per cent.[8] The monopoly so created assures enormous profits, and leads to the formation of technical production units of formidable magnitude. The famous Standard Oil Company in the United States was founded in 1900: "It has an authorised capital of $150,000,000. It issued $100,000,000 common and $106,000,000 preferred stock. From 1900 to 1907 the following dividends were paid on the latter: 48, 48, 45, 44, 36, 40, 40, 40 per cent in the respective years, i.e., in all, $367,000,000. From 1882 to 1907, out of total net profits amounting to $889,000,000, $606,000,000 were distributed in dividends, and the rest went to reserve capital.[9] "In 1907 the various works of the United States Steel Corporation employed no less than 210,180 people. The largest enterprise in the German mining industry, Gelsenkirchener Bergwerksgesellschaft, in 1908 had a staff of 46,048 workers and office employees."[10] In 1902, the United States Steel Corporation already produced 9,000,000 tons of steel.[11] Its output constituted in 1901, 66.3 per cent, and in 1908, 56.1 per cent of the total output of steel in the United States.[12] The output of ore was 43.9 per cent and 46.3 per cent, respectively.

    The report of the American Government Commission on Trusts states: "Their superiority over competitors is due to the magnitude of their enterprises and their excellent technical equipment. Since its inception, the Tobacco Trust has devoted all its efforts to the universal substitution of mechanical for manual labour. With this end in view it has bought up all patents that have anything to do with the manufacture of tobacco and has spent enormous sums for this purpose. Many of these patents at first proved to be of no use, and had to be modified by the engineers employed by the trust. At the end of 1906, two subsidiary companies were formed solely to acquire patents. With the same object in view, the trust has built its own foundries, machine shops and repair shops. One of these establishments, that in Brooklyn, employs on the average 300 workers; here experiments are carried out on inventions concerning the manufacture of cigarettes, cheroots, snuff, tinfoil for packing, boxes, etc. Here, also, inventions are perfected."[13] "Other trusts also employ what are called development engineers whose business it is to devise new methods of production and to test technical improvements. The United States Steel Corporation grants big bonuses to its workers and engineers for all inventions that raise technical efficiency, or reduce cost of production."[14]

    In German large-scale industry, e.g., in the chemical industry, which has developed so enormously during these last few decades, the promotion of technical improvement is organised in the same way. By 1908 the process of concentration of production had already given rise to two main "groups" which, in their way, were also in the nature of monopolies. At first these groups constituted "dual alliances" of two pairs of big factories, each having a capital of from twenty to twenty-one million marks on the one hand, the former Meister Factory in Hochst and the Casella Factory in Frankfurt am Main; and on the other hand, the aniline and soda factory at Ludwigshafen and the former Bayer Factory at Elberfeld. Then, in 1905, one of these groups, and in 1908 the other group, each concluded an agreement with yet another big factory. The result was the formation of two "triple alliances," each with a capital of from forty to fifty million marks. And these "alliances" have already begun to "approach" each other, to reach "an understanding" about prices, etc.[15]

    Competition becomes transformed into monopoly. The result is immense progress in the socialisation of production. In particular, the process of technical invention and improvement becomes socialised.

    This is something quite different from the old free competition between manufacturers, scattered and out of touch with one another, and producing for an unknown market. Concentration has reached the point at which it is possible to make an approximate estimate of all sources of raw materials (for example, the iron ore deposits) of a country and even, as we shall see, of several countries, or of the whole world. Not only are such estimates made, but these sources are captured by gigantic monopolist associations. An approximate estimate of the capacity of markets is also made, and the associations "divide" them up amongst themselves by agreement. Skilled labour is monopolised, the best engineers are engaged; the means of transport are captured—railways in America, shipping companies in Europe and America. Capitalism in its imperialist stage leads directly to the most comprehensive socialisation of production; it, so to speak, drags the capitalists, against their will and consciousness, into some sort of a new social order, a transitional one from complete free competition to complete socialisation.

    Production becomes social, but appropriation remains private. The social means of production remain the private property of a few. The general framework of formally recognised free competition remains, and the yoke of a few monopolists on the rest of the population becomes a hundred times heavier, more burdensome and intolerable.

    The German economist, Kestner, has written a book especially devoted to "the struggle between the cartels and outsiders", i.e., the capitalists outside the cartels. He entitled his work Compulsory Organisation, although, in order to present capitalism in its true light, he should, of course, have written about compulsory submission to monopolist associations. It is instructive to glance at least at the list of the methods the monopolist associations resort to in the present-day, the latest, the civilised struggle for "organisation": (1) stopping supplies of raw materials ... ("one of the most important methods of compelling adherence to the cartel"); (2) stopping the supply of labour by means of "alliances" (i.e., of agreements between the capitalists and the trade unions by which the latter permit their members to work only in cartelised enterprises); (3) stopping deliveries; (4) closing trade outlets; (5) agreements with the buyers, by which the latter undertake to trade only with the cartels; (6) systematic price cutting (to ruin "outside" firms, i.e., those which refuse to submit to the monopolists. Millions are spent in order to sell goods for a certain time below their cost price; there were instances when the price of petrol was thus reduced from 40 to 22 marks, i.e., almost by half!); (7) stopping credits; (8) boycott.

    Here we no longer have competition between small and large, between technically developed and backward enterprises. We see here the monopolists throttling those who do not submit to them, to their yoke, to their dictation. This is how this process is reflected in the mind of a bourgeois economist:

    "Even in the purely economic sphere," writes Kestner, "a certain change is taking place from commercial activity in the old sense of the word towards organisational-speculative activity. The greatest success no longer goes to the merchant whose technical and commercial experience enables him best of all to estimate the needs of the buyer, and who is able to discover and, so to speak, 'awaken' a latent demand; it goes to the speculative genius [?!] who knows how to estimate, or even only to sense in advance, the organisational development and the possibilities of certain connections between individual enterprises and the banks. . . ."

    Translated into ordinary human language this means that the development of capitalism has arrived at a stage when, although commodity production still "reigns" and continues to be regarded as the basis of economic life, it has in reality been undermined and the bulk of the profits go to the "geniuses" of financial manipulation. At the basis of these manipulations and swindles lies socialised production; but the immense progress of mankind, which achieved this socialisation, goes to benefit . . . the speculators. We shall see later how "on these grounds" reactionary, petty-bourgeois critics of capitalist imperialism dream of going back to "free," "peaceful" and "honest" competition.

    "The prolonged raising of prices which results from the formation of cartels," says Kestner, "has hitherto been observed only in respect of the most important means of production, particularly coal, iron and potassium, but never in respect of manufactured goods. Similarly, the increase in profits resulting from this raising of prices has been limited only to the industries which produce means of production. To this observation we must add that the industries which process raw materials (and not semi-manufactures) not only secure advantages from the cartel formation in the shape of high profits, to the detriment of the finished goods industry, but have also secured a dominating position over the latter, which did not exist under free competition."[16]

    The words which I have italicised reveal the essence of the case which the bourgeois economists admit so reluctantly and so rarely, and which the present-day defenders of opportunism, led by Kautsky, so zealously try to evade and brush aside. Domination, and the violence that is associated with it, such are the relationships that are typical of the "latest phase of capitalist development"; this is what inevitably had to result, and has resulted, from the formation of all-powerful economic monopolies.

    I shall give one more example of the methods employed by the cartels. Where it is possible to capture all or the chief sources of raw materials, the rise of cartels and formation of monopolies is particularly easy. It would be wrong, however, to assume that monopolies do not arise in other industries in which it is impossible to corner the sources of raw materials. The cement industry, for instance, can find its raw materials everywhere. Yet in Germany this industry too is strongly cartelised. The cement manufacturers have formed regional syndicates: South German, Rhine-Westphalian, etc. The prices fixed are monopoly prices: 230 to 280 marks a car-load, when the cost price is 180 marks! The enterprises pay a dividend of from 12 to 16 per cent—and it must not be forgotten that the "geniuses" of modern speculation know how to pocket big profits besides what they draw in dividends. In order to prevent competition in such a profitable industry, the monopolists even resort to various stratagems: they spread false rumours about the bad situation in their industry; anonymous warnings are published in the newspapers, like the following: "Capitalists, don't invest your capital in the cement industry!"; lastly, they buy up "outsiders" (those outside the syndicates) and pay them compensation of 60,000, 80,000 and even 150,000 marks.[17] Monopoly hews a path for itself everywhere without scruple as to the means, from paying a "modest" sum to buy off competitors, to the American device of employing dynamite against them.

    The statement that cartels can abolish crises is a fable spread by bourgeois economists who at all costs desire to place capitalism in a favourable light. On the contrary, the monopoly created in certain branches of industry increases and intensifies the anarchy inherent in capitalist production as a whole. The disparity between the development of agriculture and that of industry, which is characteristic of capitalism in general, is increased. The privileged position of the most highly cartelised, so-called heavy industry, especially coal and iron, causes "a still greater lack of co-ordination" in other branches of industry—as Jeidels, the author of one of the best works on "the relationship of the German big banks to industry," admits.[18]

    "The more developed an economic system is," writes Liefmann, an unblushing apologist of capitalism, "the more it resorts to risky enterprises, or enterprises in other countries, to those which need a great deal of time to develop, or finally, to those which are only of local importance."[19] The increased risk is connected in the long run with a prodigious increase of capital, which, as it were, overflows the brim, flows abroad, etc. At the same time the extremely rapid rate of technical progress gives rise to increasing elements of disparity between the various spheres of national economy, to anarchy and crises. Liefmann is obliged to admit that: "In all probability mankind will see further important technical revolutions in the near future which will also affect the organisation of the economic system"... electricity and aviation.... "As a general rule, in such periods of radical economic change, speculation develops on a large scale."...[20]

    Crises of every kind—economic crises most frequently, but not only these—in their turn increase very considerably the tendency towards concentration and towards monopoly. In this connection, the following reflections of Jeidels on the significance of the crisis of 1900, which, as we have already seen, marked the turning-point in the history of modern monopoly, are exceedingly instructive:

    "Side by side with the gigantic plants in the basic industries, the crisis of 1900 still found many plants organised on lines that today would be considered obsolete, the 'pure' (non-combined) plants, which were brought into being at the height of the industrial boom. The fall in prices and the falling off in demand put these 'pure' enterprises in a precarious position, which did not affect the gigantic combined enterprises at all or only affected them for a very short time. As a consequence of this the crisis of 1900 resulted in a far greater concentration of industry than the crisis of 1873: the latter crisis also produced a sort of selection of the best-equipped enterprises, but owing to the level of technical development at that time, this selection could not place the firms which successfully emerged from the crisis in a position of monopoly. Such a durable monopoly exists to a high degree in the gigantic enterprises in the modern iron and steel and electrical industries owing to their very complicated technique, far-reaching organisation and magnitude of capital, and, to a lesser degree, in the engineering industry, certain branches of the metallurgical industry, transport, etc."[21]

    Monopoly! This is the last word in the "latest phase of capitalist development." But we shall only have a very insufficient, incomplete, and poor notion of the real power and the significance of modern monopolies if we do not take into consideration the part played by the banks.

    

    Notes

    [1]  Figures taken from Annalen des deutschen Reichs, 1911, Zahn —Lenin

    [2]  Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1912, p. 202 —Lenin

    [3]  Finance Capital, Russ. ed., pp. 286-87 —Lenin

    [4]  Hans Gideon Heymann, Die gemischten Werke im deutschen Grosseiseugewerbe, Stuttgart, 1904, (S. 256, 278). —Lenin

    [5]  Hermann Levy, Monopole, Kartelle und Trusts, Jena, 1909, S. 286, 290, —Lenin

    [6]  Th. Vogelstein, "Die finanzielle Organisation der kapitalistischen Industrie und die Monopolbildungen" in Grundriss der Sozialökonomik, VI. Abt., Tubingen, 1914. Cf., also by the same author: Organisationsformen der Eisenindustrie und Textilindustrie in England und Amerika, Bd. 1, Lpz., 1910. —Lenin

    [7]  Dr. Riesser, Die deutschen Grossbanken und ihre Konzentration im Zusammenhange mit der Entwicklung der Gesamtwirtschaft in Deutschland, 4. Aufl., 1912, S. 149; Robert Liefmann, Kartelle und Trusts und die Weiterbildung der volkswirtschaftlichen Organisation, 2. Aufl., 1910, S. 25. —Lenin

    [8]  Dr. Fritz Kestner, Der Organisationszwang. Eine Untersuchung über die Kämpfezwischen Kartellen und Aussenseitern, Berlin, 1912, S. 11. —Lenin

    [9]  R. Liefmann, Beteiligungs- und Finanziertingsgesellschaften. Eine Studie über den modernen Kapitalismus und das Effektenwesen, 1. Aufl., Jena, 1909, S. 212. —Lenin

    [10]  Ibid., S. 218. —Lenin

    [11]  Dr. S. Tschierschky, Kartell und Trust, Göttingen, 1903, S. 13. —Lenin

    [12]  Tr. Vogelstein, Organisationsformen, S. 275. —Lenin

    [13]  Report of the Commissioner of Corporations on the Tobacco Industry, Washington, 1909, p. 266, cited according to Dr. Paul Tafel, Die nordamerikanischen Trusts und ihre Wirkungen auf den Fortschritt der Technik, Stuttgart, 1913, S. 48. —Lenin

    [14]  Dr. P. Tafel, ibid., S. 49. —Lenin

    [15]  Riesser, op. cit., third edition, p. 547 et seq. The newspapers (June 1916) report the formation of a new gigantic trust which combines the chemical industry of Germany. —Lenin

    [16]  Kestner, op.cit., S. 254 —Lenin

    [17]  L. Eschwege, "Zement" in Die Bank, 1909, S. 115 et. seq. —Lenin

    [18]  Jeidels, Das Verhältnis der deutschen Grossbanken zur Industrie mit besonderer Berüchsichtigung der Eisenindustrie, Leipzig, 1905, S. 271 —Lenin

    [19]  Liefmann, Beteiligungs- und Finanzierungsgesellschaften, S, 434. —Lenin

    [20]  Ibid, S. 465-66 —Lenin

    [21]  Jeidels, op. cit., S. 108. —Lenin

    
      
        PREFACE TO THE FRENCH AND GERMAN EDITIONS
        |
        II. BANKS AND THEIR NEW ROLE
      

      
        Document Index
      
    
    

    
      
        < Backwards
        
        Forwards >
      

      
        Works Index
        |
        Volume 22
        |
        Collected Works
        |
        L.I.A. Index


## ch02

Lenin: 1916/imp-hsc: II. BANKS AND THEIR NEW ROLE

    
	
    
    

    
    
  

  

    Vladimir Ilyich Lenin

    Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism

    A POPULAR OUTLINE

    

    

 

	    II. BANKS AND THEIR NEW ROLE

The principal and primary function of banks is to serve as
      middlemen in the making of payments. In so doing they transform
      inactive money capital into active, that is, into capital
      yielding a profit; they collect all kinds of money revenues and
      place them at the disposal of the capitalist class.

As banking develops and becomes concentrated in a small number
      of establishments, the banks grow from modest middlemen into
      powerful monopolies having at their command almost the whole of
      the money capital of all the capitalists and small businessmen
      and also the larger part of the means of production and sources
      of raw materials in any one country and in a number of
      countries. This transformation of numerous modest middlemen into
      a handful of monopolists is one of the fundamental processes in
      the growth of capitalism into capitalist imperialism; for this
      reason we must first of all examine the concentration of
      banking.

In 1907-08, the combined deposits of the German joint-stock
      banks, each having a capital of more than a million marks,
      amounted to 7,000 million marks; in 1912-13, these deposits
      already amounted to 9,800 million marks, an increase of 40 per
      cent in five years; and of the 2,800 million increase, 2,750
      million was divided among 57 banks, each having a capital of
      more than 10 million marks. The distribution of the deposits
      between big and small banks was as
follows:[1]

 

    
      
	  
	    PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL DEPOSITS
	  
	  
	     
	    In 9 big Berlin
banks
	    In the other 48
banks with
	      a capital 
of more than 10
million marks

	    In 115 banks
with a
	      capital
of 1-10
million marks

	    In small banks
(with a
	      capital
of less than a
million marks)

	  
	  
	    1907-08.....
	    47
	    32.5
	    16.5
	    4
	  
	  
	    1912-13......
	    49
	    36
	    12
	    3
	  
      
    

The small banks are being squeezed out by the big banks, of
      which only nine concentrate in their hands almost half the total
      deposits. But we have left out of account many important
      details, for instance, the transformation of numerous small
      banks into actual branches of the big banks, etc. Of this I
      shall speak later on.

At the end of 1913, Schulze-Gaevernitz estimated the deposits in
      the nine big Berlin banks at 5,100 million marks, out of a total
      of about 10,000 million marks. Taking into account not only the
      deposits, but the total bank capital, this author wrote: &#8220;At the
      end of 1909, the nine big Berlin banks, together with their
      affiliated banks, controlled 11,300 million marks, that is,
      about 83 per cent of the total German bank capital. The Deutsche
      Bank, which together with its affiliated banks controls
      nearly 3,000 million marks, represents, parallel to the Prussian
      State Railway Administration, the biggest and also the most
      decentralised accumulation of capital in the Old
World.&#8221;[2]

I have emphasised the reference to the &#8220;affiliated&#8221; banks
      because it is one of the most important distinguishing features
      of modern capitalist concentration. The big enterprises, and the
      banks in particular, not only completely absorb the small ones,
      but also &#8220;annex&#8221; them, subordinate them, bring them into their
      &#8220;own&#8221; group or &#8220;concern&#8221; (to use the technical term) by
      acquiring &#8220;holdings&#8221; in their capital, by purchasing or
      exchanging shares, by a system of credits, etc., etc. Professor
      Liefmann has written a voluminous &#8220;work&#8221; of about 500 pages
      describing modern &#8220;holding

 

and finance
companies,&#8221;[3]

unfortunately
      adding very dubious &#8220;theoretical&#8221; reflections to what is
      frequently undigested raw material. To what results this
      &#8220;holding&#8221; system leads in respect of concentration is best
      illustrated in the book written on the big German banks by
      Riesser, himself a banker. But before examining his data, let us
      quote a concrete example of the &#8220;holding&#8221; system.

The Deutsche Bank &#8220;group&#8221; is one of the biggest, if not the
      biggest, of the big banking groups. In order to trace the main
      threads which connect all the banks in this group, a distinction
      must be made between holdings of the first and second and third
      degree, or what amounts to the same thing, between dependence
      (of the lesser banks on the Deutsche Bank) in the first, second
      and third degree. We then obtain the following
picture:[4]

    
      
	  
	    The Deutsche
	      Bank
has holdings:

	    Direct or 1st
degree de-
pendence
	    2nd degree
depen-
dence
	    3rd degree
depen-
dence
	  
	  
	    Permanently
	    in 17 other
banks
	    9 of the 17 
have holdings in 
34 other banks
	    4 of the 9 have
holdings in 7
other banks
	  
	  
	    For an indefinite
period....
	    in 5 other
banks
	    &#8212;
	    &#8212;
	  
	  
	    Occasionally....
	    in 8 other 
banks
	    5 of the 8 have
holdings in 14
other banks

	    2 of the 5 have
holdings in 2
other banks
	  
	  
	    Totals......
	    in 30 other
banks
	    14 of the 30 have
holdings in 48
	      
other banks

	    6 of the 14 
have holdings
in 9
	      other 
banks

	  
      
    

Included in the eight banks &#8220;occasionally&#8221; dependent on the
      Deutsche Bank in the &#8220;first degree&#8221;, are three foreign banks:
      one Austrian (the Wiener Bankverein) and two Russian (the
      Siberian Commercial Bank and the Russian Bank for Foreign
      Trade). Altogether, the Deutsche Bank group

 

comprises, directly
      and indirectly, partially and totally, 87 banks; and the total
      capital&#8212;its own and that of others which it controls&#8212;is estimated at between two and three thousand million
      marks.

It is obvious that a bank which stands at the head of such a
      group, and which enters into agreement with half a dozen other
      banks only slightly smaller than itself for the purpose of
      conducting exceptionally big and profitable financial operations
      like floating state loans, has already outgrown the part of
      &#8220;middleman&#8221; and has become an association of a handful of
      monopolists.

The rapidity with which the concentration of banking proceeded
      in Germany at the turn of the twentieth century is shown by the
      following data which we quote in an abbreviated form from
      Riesser:

    
      
	  
	    SIX BIG BERLIN BANKS
	  
	  
	    Year
	    Branches in Germany
	    Deposit banks
and exchange
offices
	    Constant holdings in German
	      joint-
stock banks
	    Total establishments
	  
	  
	    1895...
	    16
	    14
	    1
	    42
	  
	  
	    1900...
	    21
	    40
	    8
	    80
	  
	  
	    1911...
	    104
	    276
	    63
	    450
	  
      
    

We see the rapid expansion of a close network of channels which
      cover the whole country, centralising all capital and all
      revenues, transforming thousands and thousands of scattered
      economic enterprises into a single national capitalist, and then
      into a world capitalist economy. The &#8220;decentralisation&#8221; that
      SchuIze-Gaevernitz, as an exponent of present-day bourgeois
      political economy, speaks of in the passage previously quoted,
      really means the subordination to a single centre of an
      increasing number of formerly relatively &#8220;independent,&#8221; or
      rather, strictly local economic units. In reality it is
      centralisation, the enhancement of the role, importance
      and power of monopolist giants.

In the older capitalist countries this &#8220;banking network&#8221; is
      still more close. In Great Britain and Ireland, in 1910, there
      were in all 7,151 branches of banks. Four big banks had more
      than 400  branches each (from 447 to 689); four had more than
      200 branches each, and eleven more than 100 each.

In France, three very big banks, Cr&eacute;dit
      Lyonnais, the Comptoir National and the Soci&eacute;t&eacute;
      G&eacute;n&eacute;rale extended their operations and their
      network of branches in the following
manner.[5]

    
      
	  
	    Number of branches and offices
	    Capital
(000,000 francs)
	  
	  
	    Year
	    In the prov-
inces
	    In
Paris
	    Total
	    Own
Capital
	    Deposits used
as capital
	  
	  
	    1870
	    47
	    17
	    64
	    200
	    427
	  
	  
	    1890
	    192
	    66
	    258
	    265
	    1,245
	  
	  
	    1909
	    1,033
	    196
	    1,229
	    887
	    4,363
	
      
    

In order to show the &#8220;connections&#8221; of a big modern bank, Riesser
      gives the following figures of the number of letters dispatched
      and received by the Disconto-Gesellschaft, one of the biggest
      banks in Germany and in the world (its capital in 1914 amounted
      to 300 million marks):

    
      
	  
	    Year
	    Letters 
received
	    Letters
dispatched
	  
	  
	    1852...
	    6,135
	    6,292
	  
	  
	    1870...
	    85,800
	    87,513
	  
	  
	    1900...
	    533,102
	    626,043
	  
      
    

The number of accounts of the big Paris bank, the Cr&eacute;dit
      Lyonnais, increased from 28,535  in 1875  to 633,539  in
1912.[6]

These simple figures show perhaps better than lengthy
      disquisitions how the concentration of capital and the growth of
      bank turnover are radically changing the significance of the
      banks. Scattered capitalists are transformed into a single
      collective capitalist. When carrying the current accounts of a
      few capitalists, a bank, as it were, transacts a purely
      technical and exclusively auxiliary operation. When, however,
      this operation grows to enormous dimensions we find that a
      handful of monopolists subordinate to their will all the
      operations, both commercial and industrial, of the whole of
      capitalist society; for they are enabled by means of their
      banking connections, their current accounts and other financial
      operations&#8212;first, to

 

ascertain exactly the
      financial position of the various capitalists, then to
      control them, to influence them by restricting or
      enlarging, facilitating or hindering credits, and finally to
      entirely determine  their fate, determine their income,
      deprive them of capital, or permit them to increase their
      capital rapidly and to enormous dimensions, etc.

We have just mentioned the 300  million marks capital of the
      Disconto-Gesellschaft of Berlin. This increase of the capital of
      the bank was one of the incidents in the struggle for hegemony
      between two of the biggest Berlin banks - the Deutsche Bank and
      the Disconto. In 1870, the first was still a novice and had a
      capital of only 15  million marks, while the second had a
      capital of 30  million marks. In 1908, the first had a capital
      of  200 million, while the second had 170  million. In 1914, the
      first increased its capital to 250  million and the second, by
      merging with another first-class big bank, the
      Schaaffhausenscher Bankverein, increased its capital to 300
      million. And, of course, this struggle for hegemony went hand in
      hand with the more and more frequent conclusion of &#8220;agreements&#8221;
      of an increasingly durable character between the two banks. The
      following are the conclusions that this development forces upon
      banking specialists who regard economic questions from a
      standpoint which does not in the least exceed the bounds of the
      most moderate and cautious bourgeois reformism.

Commenting on the increase of the capital of the Disconto
      Gesellschaft to 300 million marks, the German review, Die
      Bank, wrote: &#8220;Other banks will follow this same path and in
      time the three hundred men, who today govern Germany
      economically, will gradually be reduced to fifty, twenty-five or
      still fewer. It cannot be expected that this latest move towards
      concentration will be confined to banking. The close relations
      that exist between individual banks naturally lead to the
      bringing together of the industrial syndicates which these banks
      favour.... One fine morning we shall wake up in surprise to see
      nothing but trusts before our eyes, and to find ourselves faced
      with the necessity of substituting state monopolies for private
      monopolies. However, we have nothing to reproach ourselves with,
      except that we have

 

allowed things to follow their own course,
      slightly accelerated by the manipulation of
stocks.&#8221;[7]

This is an example of the impotence of bourgeois journalism
      which differs from bourgeois science only in that the latter is
      less sincere and strives to obscure the essence of the matter,
      to hide the forest behind the trees. To be &#8220;surprised&#8221; at the
      results of concentration, to &#8220;reproach&#8221; the government of
      capitalist Germany, or capitalist &#8220;society&#8221; (&#8220;ourselves&#8221;), to
      fear that the introduction of stocks and shares might
      &#8220;accelerate&#8221; concentration in the same way as the German
      &#8220;cartel&#8221; specialist Tschierschky fears the American trusts and
      &#8220;prefers&#8221; the German cartels on the grounds that they &#8220;may not,
      like the trusts, excessively accelerate technical and economic
progress&#8221;[8]

&#8212;is not all this a sign of
      impotence?

But facts remain facts. There are no trusts in Germany; there
      are &#8220;only&#8221; cartels&#8212;but Germany is governed by
      not more than three hundred magnates of capital, and the number
      of these is constantly diminishing. At all events, banks greatly
      intensify and accelerate the process of concentration of capital
      and the formation of monopolies in all capitalist countries,
      notwithstanding all the differences in their banking laws.

The banking system &#8220;possesses, indeed, the form of universal
      book-keeping and distribution of means of production on a social
      scale, but solely the form,&#8221; wrote Marx in Capital
      half a century ago

(Russ. trans., Vol.&#160;III, part&#160;II,
p.&#160;144.[24])
The figures we have quoted on the growth of
      bank capital, on the increase in the number of the branches and
      offices of the biggest banks, the increase in the number of
      their accounts, etc., present a concrete picture of this
      &#8220;universal book-keeping&#8221; of the whole capitalist class;
      and not only of the capitalists, for the banks collect, even
      though temporarily, all kinds of money revenues&#8212;of small
      businessmen, office clerks, and of a tiny upper stratum of the
      working class. &#8220;Universal distribution of means of
      production&#8221;&#8212;that, from the formal aspect, is what grows out of the
      modern banks, which, numbering some three to six of the biggest

 

in France, and six to eight in Germany, control millions and
      millions. In substance, however, the distribution of
      means of production is not at all &#8220;universal,&#8221; but private,
      i.e., it conforms to the interests of big capital, and
      primarily, of huge, monopoly capital, which operates under
      conditions in which the masses live in want, in which the whole
      development of agriculture hopelessly lags behind the
      development of industry, while within industry itself the &#8220;heavy
      industries&#8221; exact tribute from all other branches of industry.

In the matter of socialising capitalist economy the
      savings-banks and post-offices are beginning to compete with the
      banks; they are more &#8220;decentralised,&#8221; i.e., their influence
      extends to a greater number of localities, to more remote
      places, to wider sections of the population. Here is the data
      collected by an American commission on the comparative growth of
      deposits in banks and
savings-banks:[9]

    
      
	  
	    DEPOSITS (000,000,000 marks)
	  
	  
	    Year
	    Britain
	    France
	    Germany
	  
	  
	      
	    Banks
	    Savings-
banks
	    Banks
	    Savings-
banks
	    Banks
	    Credit
Societies
	    Savings-
banks
	  
	  
	    1880...
	    8.4
	    1.6
	    ?
	    0.9
	    0.5
	    0.4
	    2.6
	  
	  
	    1888...
	    12.4
	    2.0
	    1.5
	    2.1
	    1.1
	    0.4
	    4.5
	  
	  
	    1908...
	    23.2
	    4.2
	    3.7
	    4.2
	    7.1
	    2.2
	    13.9
	  
      
    

As they pay interest at the rate of 4 per cent and 4 1/4 per
      cent on deposits, the savings-banks must seek &#8220;profitable&#8221;
      investments for their capital, they must deal in bills,
      mortgages, etc. The boundaries between the banks and the
      savings-banks &#8220;become more and more obliterated.&#8221; The Chambers
      of Commerce of Bochum and Erfurt, for example, demand that
      savings-banks be &#8220;prohibited&#8221; from engaging in &#8220;purely&#8221; banking
      business, such as discounting bills; they demand the limitation
      of the &#8220;banking&#8221; operations of the
post-office.[10]

The banking
      magnates seem to be afraid that state monopoly will steal upon
      them from an unexpected quarter. It goes without saying,
      however, that this fear is

 

no more than an expression of the
      rivalry, so to speak, between two department managers in the
      same office; for, on the one hand, the millions entrusted to the
      savings-banks are in the final analysis actually controlled by
      these very same bank capital magnates, while, on the
      other hand, state monopoly in capitalist society is merely a
      means of increasing and guaranteeing the income of millionaires
      in some branch of industry who are on the verge of bankruptcy.

The change from the old type of capitalism, in which free
      competition predominated, to the new capitalism, in which
      monopoly reigns, is expressed, among other things, by a decline
      in the importance of the Stock Exchange. The review, Die
      Bank, writes: &#8220;The Stock Exchange has long ceased to be the
      indispensable medium of circulation that it formerly was when
      the banks were not yet able to place the bulk of new issues with
      their
clients.&#8221;[11]

&#8220;&#8217;Every bank is a Stock Exchange,&#8217; and the bigger the bank, and
      the more successful the concentration of banking, the truer does
      this modern aphorism
ring.&#8221;[12]

&#8220;While formerly, in the seventies,
the Stock Exchange, flushed with the exuberance of youth&#8221; (a
&#8220;subtle&#8221; allusion to the Stock Exchange crash of 1873, the 
company promotion
scandals,[25] etc.), &#8220;opened the era of the
     industrialisation of Germany, nowadays the banks and industry
      are able to &#8216;manage it alone.&#8217; The domination of our big banks
      over the Stock Exchange ... is nothing else than the expression
      of the completely organised German industrial state. If the
      domain of the automatically functioning economic laws is thus
      restricted, and if the domain of conscious regulation by the
      banks is considerably enlarged, the national economic
      responsibility of a few guiding heads is immensely increased,&#8221;
      so writes the German Professor
Schulze-Gaevernitz,[13]

an
      apologist of German imperialism, who is regarded as an authority
      by the imperialists of all countries, and who tries to gloss
      over the &#8220;mere detail&#8221; that the &#8220;conscious regulation&#8221; of
      economic life by the banks consists in the fleecing of the
      public by a handful of &#8220;completely organised&#8221; monopolists.

 

The
      task of a bourgeois professor is not to lay bare the entire
      mechanism, or to expose all the machinations of the bank
      monopolists, but rather to present them in a favourable light.

In the same way, Riesser, a still more authoritative economist
      and himself a banker, makes shift with meaningless phrases in
      order to explain away undeniable facts: &#8220;... the Stock Exchange
      is steadily losing the feature which is absolutely essential for
      national economy as a whole and for the circulation of
      securities in particular&#8212;that of being not only a most
      exact measuring-rod, but also an almost automatic regulator of
      the economic movements which converge on
it.&#8221;[14]

In other words, the old capitalism, the capitalism of free
      competition with its indispensable regulator, the Stock
      Exchange, is passing away. A new capitalism has come to take its
      place, bearing obvious features of something transient, a
      mixture of free competition and monopoly. The question naturally
      arises: into what is this new capitalism &#8220;developing&#8221;? But the
      bourgeois scholars are afraid to raise this question.

&#8220;Thirty years ago, businessmen, freely competing against one
      another, performed nine-tenths of the work connected with their
      business other than manual labour. At the present time,
      nine-tenths of this &#8216;brain work&#8217; is performed by
      employees. Banking is in the forefront of this
evolution.&#8221;[15]

This admission by
      Schulze-Gaevernitz brings us once again to the question: into
      what is this new capitalism, capitalism in its imperialist
      stage, developing?

Among the few banks which remain at the head of all capitalist
      economy as a result of the process of concentration, there is
      naturally to be observed an increasingly marked tendency towards
      monopolist agreements, towards a bank trust. In
      America, not nine, but two very big banks, those of the
      multimillionaires Rockefeller and Morgan, control a capital of
      eleven thousand million
marks.[16]

In Germany the absorption of the
      Schaaffhausenscher Bankverein by

 

the Disconto-Gesellschaft to
      which I referred above, was commented on in the following terms
      by the Frankfurter
Zeitung,[26] 
an organ of Stock Exchange interests:

&#8220;The concentration movement of the banks is narrowing the circle
      of establishments from which it is possible to obtain credits,
      and is consequently increasing the dependence of big industry
      upon a small number of banking groups. In view of the close
      connection between industry and the financial world, the freedom
      of movement of industrial companies which need banking capital
      is restricted. For this reason, big industry is watching the
      growing trustification of the banks with mixed feelings. Indeed,
      we have repeatedly seen the beginnings of certain agreements
      between the individual big banking concerns, which aim at
      restricting
competition.&#8221;[17]

Again and again, the final word in the development of banking is
      monopoly.

As regards the close connection between the banks and industry,
      it is precisely in this sphere that the new role of the banks
      is, perhaps, most strikingly felt. When a bank discounts a bill
      for a firm, opens a current account for it, etc., these
      operations, taken separately, do not in the least diminish its
      independence, and the bank plays no other part than that of a
      modest middleman. But when such operations are multiplied and
      become an established practice, when the bank &#8220;collects&#8221; in its
      own hands enormous amounts of capital, when the running of a
      current account for a given firm enables the bank&#8212;and
      this is what happens&#8212;to obtain fuller and more detailed
      information about the economic position of its client, the
      result is that the industrial capitalist becomes more completely
      dependent on the bank.

At the same time a personal link-up, so to speak, is established
      between the banks and the biggest industrial and commercial
      enterprises, the merging of one with another through the
      acquisition of shares, through the appointment of bank directors
      to the Supervisory Boards (or Boards of Directors) of industrial
      and commercial enterprises, and vice versa. The German
      economist, Jeidels, has compiled most detailed data on this form
      of concentration of capital

 

and of enterprises. Six of the
      biggest Berlin banks were represented by their directors in 344
      industrial companies; and by their board members in 407 others,
      making a total of 751 companies. In 289 of these companies they
      either had two of their representatives on each of the
      respective Supervisory Boards, or held the posts of chairmen. We
      find these industrial and commercial companies in the most
      diverse branches of industry: insurance, transport, restaurants,
      theatres, art industry, etc. On the other hand, on the
      Supervisory Boards of these six banks (in 1910) were fifty-one
      of the biggest industrialists, including the director of Krupp,
      of the powerful &#8220;Hapag&#8221; (Hamburg-Amerika Line), etc., etc. From
      1895 to 1910, each of these six banks participated in the share
      and bond issues of many hundreds of industrial companies (the
      number ranging from 281 to
419).[18]

The &#8220;personal link-up&#8221; between the banks and industry is
      supplemented by the &#8220;personal link-up&#8221; between both of them and
      the government. &#8220;Seats on Supervisory Boards,&#8221; writes Jeidels,
      &#8220;are freely offered to persons of title, also to ex-civil
      servants, who are able to do a great deal to facilitate (!!)
      relations with the authorities.&#8221; . . . &#8220;Usually, on the
      Supervisory Board of a big bank, there is a member of parliament
      or a Berlin city councillor.&#8221;

The building and development, so to speak, of the big capitalist
      monopolies is therefore going on full steam ahead in all
      &#8220;natural&#8221; and &#8220;supernatural&#8221; ways. A sort of division of labour
      is being systematically developed amongst the several hundred
      kings of finance who reign over modern capitalist society:

&#8220;Simultaneously with this widening of the sphere of activity of
      certain big industrialists (joining the boards of banks, etc.)
      and with the assignment of provincial bank managers to definite
      industrial regions, there is a growth of specialisation among
      the directors of the big banks. Generally speaking, this
      specialisation is only conceivable when banking is conducted on
      a large scale, and particularly when it has widespread
      connections with industry. This division of labour proceeds
      along two lines: on the one hand, relations with industry as a
      whole are entrusted to one director,

 

as his special function; on
      the other, each director assumes the supervision of several
      separate enterprises, or of a group of enterprises in the same
      branch of industry or having similar interests.... (Capitalism
      has already reached the stage of organised supervision of
      individual enterprises.) One specialises in German industry,
      sometimes even in West German industry alone (the West is the
      most industrialised part of Germany), others specialise in
      relations with foreign states and foreign industry, in
      information on the characters of industrialists and others, in
      Stock Exchange questions, etc. Besides, each bank director is
      often assigned a special locality or a special branch of
      industry; one works chiefly on Supervisory Boards of electric
      companies, another, on chemical, brewing, or beet sugar plants,
      a third, in a few isolated industrial enterprises, but at the
      same time works on the Supervisory Boards of insurance
      companies.... In short, there can be no doubt that the growth in
      the dimensions and diversity of the big banks&#8217; operations is
      accompanied by an increase in the division of labour among their
      directors with the object (and result) of, so to speak, lifting
      them somewhat out of pure banking and making them better
      experts, better judges of the general problems of industry and
      the special problems of each branch of industry, thus making
      them more capable of acting within the respective bank&#8217;s
      industrial sphere of influence. This system is supplemented by
      the banks&#8217; endeavours to elect to their Supervisory Boards men
      who are experts in industrial affairs, such as industrialists,
      former officials, especially those formerly in the railway
      service or in mining,&#8221;
etc.[19]

We find the same system only in a slightly different form in
      French banking. For instance, one of the three biggest French
      banks, the Cr&eacute;dit Lyonnais, has organised a financial
      research service (service des &eacute;tudes
      financi&egrave;res), which permanently employs over fifty
      engineers, statisticians, economists, lawyers, etc. This costs
      from six to seven hundred thousand francs annually. The service
      is in turn divided into eight departments: one specialises in
      collecting information on industrial establishments, another
      studies

 

general statistics, a third, railway and steamship
      companies, a fourth, securities, a fifth, financial reports,
      etc.[20]

The result is, on the one hand, the ever-growing merger, or, as
      N. I. Bukharin aptly calls it, coalescence, of bank and
      industrial capital and, on the other hand, the growth of the
      banks into institutions of a truly &#8220;universal character&#8221;. On
      this question I find it necessary to quote the exact terms used
      by Jeidels, who has best studied the subject:

&#8220;An examination of the sum total of industrial relationships
      reveals the universal character of the financial
      establishments working on behalf of industry. Unlike other kinds
      of banks, and contrary to the demand sometimes expressed in the
      literature that banks should specialise in one kind of business
      or in one branch of industry in order to prevent the ground from
      slipping from under their feet&#8212;the big banks are striving
      to make their connections with industrial enterprises as varied
      as possible in respect of the locality or branches of industry
      and are striving to eliminate the unevenness in the distribution
      of capital among localities and branches of industry resulting
      from the historical development of individual enterprises.&#8221; &#8220;One
      tendency is to make the connections with industry general;
      another tendency is to make them durable and close. In the six
      big banks both these tendencies are realised, not in full, but
      to a considerable extent and to an equal degree.&#8221;

Quite often industrial and commercial circles complain of the
      &#8220;terrorism&#8221; of the banks. And it is not surprising that such
      complaints are heard, for the big banks &#8220;command,&#8221; as will be
      seen from the following example. On November 19, 1901, one of
      the big, so-called Berlin &#8220;D&#8221; banks (the names of the four
      biggest banks begin with the letter D) wrote to the Board of
      Directors of the German Central Northwest Cement Syndicate in
      the following terms: &#8220;As we learn from the notice you published
      in a certain newspaper of the 18th inst., we must reckon with
      the possibility that the next general meeting of your syndicate,
      to be held on the 30th of this month, may decide on measures
      which are likely

 

to effect changes in your enterprise which are
      unacceptable to us. We deeply regret that, for these reasons, we
      are obliged henceforth to withdraw the credit which had hitherto
      been allowed you.... But if the said next general meeting does
      not decide upon measures which are unacceptable to us, and if we
      receive suitable guarantees on this matter for the future, we
      shall be quite willing to open negotiations with you on the
      grant of a new
credit.&#8221;[21]

As a matter of fact, this is small capital&#8217;s old complaint about
      being oppressed by big capital, but in this case it was a whole
      syndicate that fell into the category of &#8220;small&#8221; capital! The
      old struggle between small and big capital is being resumed at a
      new and immeasurably higher stage of development. It stands to
      reason that the big banks&#8217; enterprises, worth many millions, can
      accelerate technical progress with means that cannot possibly be
      compared with those of the past. The banks, for example, set up
      special technical research societies, and, of course, only
      &#8220;friendly&#8221; industrial enterprises benefit from their work. To
      this category belong the Electric Railway Research Association,
      the Central Bureau of Scientific and Technical Research, etc.

The directors of the big banks themselves cannot fail to see
      that new conditions of national economy are being created; but
      they are powerless in the face of these phenomena.

&#8220;Anyone who has watched, in recent years,&#8221; writes Jeidels, &#8220;the
      changes of incumbents of directorships and seats on the
      Supervisory Boards of the big banks, cannot fail to have noticed
      that power is gradually passing into the hands of men who
      consider the active intervention of the big banks in the general
      development of industry to be necessary and of increasing
      importance. Between these new men and the old bank directors,
      disagreements on this subject of a business and often of a
      personal nature are growing. The issue is whether or not the
      banks, as credit institutions, will suffer from this
      intervention in industry, whether they are sacrificing tried
      principles and an assured profit to engage in a field of
      activity which has nothing in common

 

with their role as
      middlemen in providing credit, and which is leading the banks
      into a field where they are more than ever before exposed to the
      blind forces of trade fluctuations. This is the opinion of many
      of the older bank directors, while most of the young men
      consider active intervention in industry to be a necessity as
      great as that which gave rise, simultaneously with big modern
      industry, to the big banks and modern industrial banking. The
      two parties are agreed only on one point: that there are neither
      firm principles nor a concrete aim in the new activities of the
      big
banks.&#8221;[22]

The old capitalism has had its day. The new capitalism
      represents a transition towards something. It is hopeless, of
      course, to seek for &#8220;firm principles and a concrete aim&#8221; for the
      purpose of &#8220;reconciling&#8221; monopoly with free competition. The
      admission of the practical men has quite a different ring from
      the official praises of the charms of &#8220;organised&#8221; capitalism
      sung by its apologists, Schulze-Gaevernitz, Liefmann and similar
      &#8220;theoreticians.&#8221;

At precisely what period were the &#8220;new activities&#8221; of the big
      banks finally established? Jeidels gives us a fairly exact
      answer to this important question:

&#8220;The connections between the banks and industrial enterprises,
      with their new content, their new forms and their new organs,
      namely, the big banks which are organised on both a centralised
      and a decentralised basis, were scarcely a characteristic
      economic phenomenon before the nineties; in one sense, indeed,
      this initial date may be advanced to the year 1897, when the
      important  mergers took place and when, for the first time, the
      new form of decentralised organisation was introduced to suit
      the industrial policy of the banks. This starting-point could
      perhaps be placed at an even later date, for it was the crisis
      of 1900 that enormously accelerated and intensified the process
      of concentration of industry and of banking, consolidated that
      process, for the first time transformed the connection with
      industry into the actual monopoly of the big banks, and made
      this connection much closer and more
active.&#8221;[23]

Thus, the twentieth century marks the turning-point from the old
      capitalism to the new, from the domination of capital in general
      to the domination of finance capital.

     

    

    Notes

     

[1]

Alfred
      Lansburgh, &#8220;F&uuml;nf Jahre deutsches Bankwesen&#8221; in Die
      Bank, 1913, No. 8.
&#8212;Lenin

[2]

Schulze-Gaevernitz, &#8220;Die deutsche Kreditbank&#8221; in &#8220;Grundriss
      der Sozial&ouml;konomik&#8221;, T&uuml;bingen, 1915, 137.
&#8212;Lenin

[3]

R. Liefmann, Beteilgungs- und Finanzierungsgesellschaften.
      Eine Studie &uuml;ber den modernen Kapitalismus und das
      Effektenwesen, I., Jena, 1909, 212.
&#8212;Lenin

[4]

Alfred
      Lansburgh, &#8220;Das Beteilgungssystem im deutschen Bankwesen&#8221;, in
      Die Bank, 1910, 500.
&#8212;Lenin

[5]

Eugen
      Kaufmann, Das franz&ouml;sische Bankwesen,
      T&uuml;bingen, 1911, 356 and 362
&#8212;Lenin

[6]

Jean
      Lescure, L&#8217;&eacute;pargne en France, Paris, 1914,
      p. 52.
&#8212;Lenin

[7]

A. Lansburgh, &#8220;Die Bank mit den 300 Millionen&#8221; in Die
      Bank, 1914, p. 426
&#8212;Lenin

[8]

S. Tschierschky, op. cit., 128.
&#8212;Lenin

[9]

Statistics of the National Monetary Commission, quoted
      in Die Bank, 1910, S. 1200.
&#8212;Lenin

[10]

Die Bank, 1913, S 811.
&#8212;Lenin

[11]

Die Bank, 1914, S 316.
&#8212;Lenin

[12]

Dr. Oscar Stillich, Geld- und Bankwesen, Berlin, 1907,
      S. 169.
&#8212;Lenin

[13]

Schulze-Gaevernitz, &#8220;Die deutsche Kreditbank&#8221; in Grundriss
      der Sozial&ouml;konomik, T&uuml;bingen, 1915, S. 101
&#8212;Lenin

[14]

Riesser, op. cit., 4th ed., S 629.
&#8212;Lenin

[15]

Schulze-Gaevernitz, &#8220;Die deutsche Kreditbank&#8221; in Grundriss
      der Sozial&ouml;konomik, T&uuml;bingen, 1915, S. 151
&#8212;Lenin

[16]

Die Bank, 1912, S. 435.
&#8212;Lenin

[17]

Quoted by Schulze-Gaevernitz, op. cit., S 155
&#8212;Lenin

[18]

Jeidels, op. cit.; Riesser, op. cit.
&#8212;Lenin

[19]

Jeidels, op. cit., S 156-57
&#8212;Lenin

[20]

An
      article by Eug. Kaufmann on French banks in Die Bank,
      1909, 2, S 851 et. seq.
&#8212;Lenin

[21]

Dr. Oscar Stillich, Geld- und Bankwesen, Berlin,
      1907, S. 147.
&#8212;Lenin

[22]

Jeidels, op. cit., S 183-84
&#8212;Lenin

[23]

ibid, S. 181.
&#8212;Lenin

     

[24]
[PLACEHOLDER.]

[25]
[PLACEHOLDER.]

[26]
[PLACEHOLDER.]

    

     

            
          

I. CONCENTRATION OF PRODUCTION AND MONOPOLIES

          |

          

III. FINANCE CAPITAL AND THE FINANCIAL OLIGARCHY

            

           

    

    
      
	

	  

	    
	      <
		  backward

	       &#160; &#160; 
	      Contents
	       &#160; &#160; 

	      forward >
	    

	  
	  

	    
	      Works
		  Index   |  

	      Volume 22
	    

	     | 

	    
	      Collected Works

	        |   L.I.A. Index
	    
	  
	
      
    

    &#160;


## ch03

Lenin: 1916/imp-hsc: III. FINANCE CAPITAL AND THE FINANCIAL OLIGARCHY

    
	
    
    

    
    
  

  

    Vladimir Ilyich Lenin

    Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism

    A POPULAR OUTLINE

    

    

 

III. FINANCE CAPITAL AND THE FINANCIAL OLIGARCHY

&#8220;A steadily increasing proportion of capital in industry,&#8221;
      writes Hilferding, &#8220;ceases to belong to the industrialists who
      employ it. They obtain the use of it only through the medium of
      the banks which, in relation to them, represent the owners of
      the capital. On the other hand, the bank is forced to sink an
      increasing share of its funds in industry. Thus, to an ever
      greater degree the banker is being transformed into an
      industrial capitalist. This bank capital, i.e., capital in money
      form, which is thus actually transformed into industrial
      capital, I call &#8216;finance capital&#8217;.&#8221; &#8220;Finance capital is
      capital controlled by banks and employed by
industrialists.&#8221;[1]

This definition is incomplete insofar as it is silent on one
      extremely important fact&#8212;on the increase of concentration
      of production and of capital to such an extent that
      concentration is leading, and has led, to monopoly. But
      throughout the whole of his work, and particularly in the two
      chapters preceding the one from which this definition is taken,
      Hilferding stresses the part played by capitalist
      monopolies.

The concentration of production; the monopolies arising
      therefrom; the merging or coalescence of the banks with industry&#8212;such is the history of the rise of finance capital and
      such is the content of that concept.

We now have to describe how, under the general conditions of
      commodity production and private property, the &#8220;business
      operations&#8221; of capitalist monopolies inevitably lead to the
      domination of a financial oligarchy. It should be noted that
      German&#8212;and not only German&#8212;bourgeois scholars,
      like Riesser, Schulze-Gaevernitz, Liefmann and others, are all
      apologists of imperialism and of finance capital.

  

Instead of
      revealing the &#8220;mechanics&#8221; of the formation of an oligarchy, its
      methods, the size of its revenues &#8220;impeccable and peccable,&#8221; its
      connections with parliaments etc., etc., they obscure or gloss
      over them. They evade these &#8220;vexed questions&#8221; by pompous and
      vague phrases, appeals to the &#8220;sense of responsibility&#8221; of bank
      directors, by praising &#8220;the sense of duty&#8221; of Prussian
      officials, giving serious study to the petty details of
      absolutely ridiculous parliamentary bills for the &#8220;supervision&#8221;
      and &#8220;regulation&#8221; of monopolies, playing spillikins with
      theories, like, for example, the following &#8220;scholarly&#8221;
      definition, arrived at by Professor Liefmann:
      &#8220;Commerce is an occupation having for its object the
      collection, storage and supply of goods.&#8221;[2]

(The
      Professor&#8217;s bold-face italics.) . . . From this it would follow
      that commerce existed in the time of primitive man, who knew
      nothing about exchange, and that it will exist under socialism!

But the monstrous facts concerning the monstrous rule of the
      financial oligarchy are so glaring that in all capitalist
      countries, in America, France and Germany, a whole literature
      has sprung up, written from the bourgeois point of
      view, but which, nevertheless, gives a fairly truthful picture
      and criticism&#8212;petty-bourgeois, naturally&#8212;of this
      oligarchy.

Paramount importance attaches to the &#8220;holding system,&#8221; already
      briefly referred to above. The German economist, Heymann,
      probably the first to call attention to this matter, describes
      the essence of it in this way:

&#8220;The head of the concern controls the principal company
      (literally: the &#8220;mother company&#8221;); the latter reigns over the
      subsidiary companies (&#8220;daughter companies&#8221;) which in their turn
      control still other subsidiaries (&#8220;grandchild companies&#8221;),
      etc. In this way, it is possible with a comparatively small
      capital to dominate immense spheres of production. Indeed, if
      holding 50 per cent of the capital is always sufficient to
      control a company, the head of the concern needs only one
      million to control eight million in the second subsidiaries. And
      if this &#8216;interlocking&#8217; is extended,

  

it is possible with one
      million to control sixteen million, thirty-two million,
etc.&#8221;[3]

As a matter of fact, experience shows that it is sufficient to
      own 40 per cent of the shares of a company in order to direct
      its
affairs,[4]

since in practice a certain number
      of small, scattered shareholders find it impossible to attend
      general meetings, etc. The &#8220;democratisation&#8221; of the ownership of
      shares, from which the bourgeois sophists and opportunist
      so-called &#8220;Social-Democrats&#8221; expect (or say that they expect)
      the &#8220;democratisation of capital,&#8221; the strengthening of the role
      and significance of small scale production, etc., is, in fact,
      one of the ways of increasing the power of the financial
      oligarchy. Incidentally, this is why, in the more advanced, or
      in the older and more &#8220;experienced&#8221; capitalist countries, the
      law allows the issue of shares of smaller denomination. In
      Germany, the law does not permit the issue of shares of less
      than one thousand marks denomination, and the magnates of German
      finance look with an envious eye at Britain, where the issue of
      one-pound shares (= 20 marks, about 10 rubles) is permitted.
      Siemens, one of the biggest industrialists and &#8220;financial kings&#8221;
      in Germany, told the Reichstag on June 7, 1900, that &#8220;the
      one-pound share is the basis of British
imperialism.&#8221;[5]

This
      merchant has a much deeper and more &#8220;Marxist&#8221; understanding of
      imperialism than a certain disreputable writer who is held to be
      one of the founders of Russian
Marxism[21] and believes that imperialism is a bad habit of a certain
nation....

But the &#8220;holding system&#8221; not only serves enormously to increase
      the power of the monopolists; it also enables them to resort
      with impunity to all sorts of shady and dirty tricks to cheat
      the public, because formally the directors of the &#8220;mother
      company&#8221; are not legally responsible for the &#8220;daughter company&#8221;,
      which is supposed to be &#8220;independent&#8221;, and through the
      medium of which they can &#8220;pull off&#8221; anything.

  

Here is an example taken from the German review, Die Bank,
      for May 1914:

&#8220;The Spring Steel Company of Kassel was regarded some years ago
      as being one of the most profitable enterprises in
      Germany. Through bad management its dividends fell from 15 per
      cent to nil. It appears that the Board, without consulting the
      shareholders, had loaned six million marks to one of
      its &#8216;daughter companies&#8217;, the Hassia Company, which had a
      nominal capital of only some hundreds of thousands of
      marks. This commitment, amounting to nearly treble the capital
      of the &#8216;mother company&#8217;, was never mentioned in its
      balance-sheets. This omission was quite legal and could be
      hushed up for two whole years because it did not violate any
      point of company law. The chairman of the Supervisory Board, who
      as the responsible head had signed the false balance-sheets,
      was, and still is, the president of the Kassel Chamber of
      Commerce. The shareholders only heard of the loan to the  Hassia
      Company long afterwards, when it had been proved to be a
      mistake&#8221;... (the writer should put this word in inverted
      commas) ... &#8220;and when Spring Steel shares dropped nearly 100
      per&#160;cent, because those in the know were getting rid of them....

&#8220;This typical example of balance-sheet jugglery, quite
      common in joint-stock companies, explains why their Boards
      of Directors are willing to undertake risky transactions with a
      far lighter heart than individual businessmen. Modern methods of
      drawing up balance-sheets not only make it possible to conceal
      doubtful undertakings from the ordinary shareholder, but also
      allow the people most concerned to escape the consequence of
      unsuccessful speculation by selling their shares in time when
      the individual businessman risks his own skin in everything he
      does....

&#8220;The balance-sheets of many joint-stock companies put us in mind
      of the palimpsests of the Middle Ages from which the visible
      inscription had first to be erased in order to discover beneath
      it another inscription giving the real meaning of the
      document. [Palimpsests are parchment documents from which the
      original inscription has been erased and another inscription
      imposed.]

&#8220;The simplest and, therefore, most common procedure for making
      balance-sheets indecipherable is to divide a single

  

business
      into several parts by setting up &#8216;daughter companies&#8217;&#8212;or
      by annexing them. The advantages of this system for various
      purposes&#8212;legal and illegal&#8212;are so evident that big
      companies which do not employ it are quite the
exception.&#8221;[6]

As an example of a huge monopolist company that extensively
      employs this system, the author quotes the famous General
      Electric Company (the A.E.G., to which I shall refer again later
      on). In 1912, it was calculated that this company held shares in
      175 to 200 other companies, dominating them, of course, and thus
      controlling a total capital of about 1,500 million
      marks.[7]

None of the rules of control, the publication of balance-sheets,
      the drawing up of balance-sheets according to a definite form,
      the public auditing of accounts, etc., the things about which
      well-intentioned professors and officials&#8212;that is, those
      imbued with the good intention of defending and prettyfying
      capitalism&#8212;discourse to the public, are of any avail; for
      private property is sacred, and no one can be prohibited from
      buying, selling, exchanging or hypothecating shares, etc.

The extent to which this &#8220;holding system&#8221; has developed in the
      big Russian banks may be judged by the figures given by
      E. Agalid, who for fifteen years was an official of the
      Russo-Chinese Bank and who, in May 1914, published a book, not
      altogether correctly entitled Big Banks and the World
      Market.[8]

The author divides the big Russian
      banks into two main groups: (a) banks that come under the
      &#8220;holding system,&#8221; and (b) &#8220;independent&#8221; banks&#8212;&#8220;independence&#8221;  however, being arbitrarily taken to mean
      independence of foreign banks. The author divides the
      first group into three subgroups: (1) German holdings, (2)
      British holdings, and (3) French holdings, having in view the

  

&#8220;holdings&#8221; and domination of the big foreign banks of the
      particular country mentioned. The author divides the capital of
      the banks into &#8220;productively&#8221; invested capital (industrial and
      commercial undertakings), and &#8220;speculatively&#8221; invested capital
      (in Stock Exchange and financial operations), assuming, from his
      petty-bourgeois reformist point of view, that it is possible,
      under capitalism, to separate the first form of investment from
      the second and to abolish the second form.

Here are the figures he supplies:

    
      
	  
	    BANK ASSETS
(According to
	    Reports for October-November 1912
000,000 rubles

	  
	  
	     
	    Capital Invested
	  
	  
	    Groups of Russian banks
	    Productively
	    Speculatively
	    Total
	  
	  
	    a 1)
	    Four banks: Siberian
	      Commercial,
Russian , International, and 
Discount
	      Bank....

	    413.7
	    859.1
	    1,272.8
	
	  
	    a 2)
	    Two banks: Commercial and
Industrial,
	      and Russo-British

	    239.3
	    169.1
	    408.4
	  
	  
	    a 3)
	    Five banks: Russian-Asiatic,
	      St.
Petersburg Private, Azov-Don,
Union Moscow,
	      Russo-
French Commercial

	    711.8
	    661.2
	    1,373.0
	  
	  
	     
	    (11 banks) Total..............a) = 
	    1,364.8
	    1,689.4
	    3,054.2
	  
	  
	    b)
	    Eight banks: Moscow
	      Merchants,
Volga-Kama, Junker and Co.,
	      
St. Petersburg Commercial (formerly
Wawelberg),
	      Bank of Moscow (formerly
Ryabushinsky), Moscow
	      Discount,
Moscow Commercial,
	      Moscow
Private.......

	    504.2
	    391.1
	    895.3
	  
	  
	     
	    (10 banks) Total ..........
	    1,869.0
	    2,080.5
	    3,949.5
	  
      
    

According to these figures, of the approximately 4,000 million
      rubles making up the &#8220;working&#8221; capital of the big banks,
      more than three-fourths, more than 3,000 million,
      belonged to banks which in reality were only &#8220;daughter
      companies&#8221; of foreign banks, and chiefly of Paris banks (the
      famous trio: Union Parisienne, Paris et Pays-Bas

  

and
      Soci&#233;t&#233; G&#233;n&#233;rale), and of Berlin banks
      (particularly the Deutsche Bank and Disconto-Gesellschaft). Two
      of the biggest Russian banks, the Russian (Russian Bank for
      Foreign Trade) and the International (St. Petersburg
      International Commercial Bank), between 1906 and 1912 increased
      their capital from 44 to 98 million rubles, and their reserves
      from 15 million to 39 million &#8220;employing three-fourths German
      capital.&#8221; The first bank belongs to the Berlin Deutsche Bank
      &#8220;concern&#8221; and the second to the Berlin
      Disconto-Gesellschaft. The worthy Agahd is deeply indignant at
      the majority of the shares being held by the Berlin banks, so
      that the Russian shareholders are, therefore,
      powerless. Naturally, the country which exports capital skims
      the cream; for example, the Berlin Deutsche Bank, before placing
      the shares of the Siberian Commercial Bank on the Berlin market,
      kept them in its portfolio for a whole year, and then sold them
      at the rate of 193 for 100, that is, at nearly twice their
      nominal
      value, &#8220;earning&#8221; a profit of nearly six million rubles, which
      Hilferding calls &#8220;promoter&#8217;s profits.&#8221;

Our author puts the total &#8220;capacity&#8221; of the principal
      St. Petersburg banks at 8,235 million rubles, well over 8,000
      million, and the &#8220;holdings,&#8221; or rather, the extent to which
      foreign banks dominated them, he estimates as follows: French
      banks, 55 per cent; British, 10 per cent; German, 35 per
      cent. The author calculates that of the total of 8,235 million
      rubles of functioning capital, 3,687 million rubles, or over 40
      per cent, fall to the share of the Produgol and Prodamet
syndicates[22] and the syndicates in the oil, metallurgical and
      cement industries. Thus, owing to the formation of capitalist
      monopolies, the merging of bank and industrial capital has also
      made enormous strides in Russia.

Finance capital, concentrated in a few hands and exercising a
      virtual monopoly, exacts enormous and ever-increasing profits
      from the floating of companies, issue of stock, state loans,
      etc., strengthens the domination of the financial oligarchy and
      levies tribute upon the whole of society for the benefit of
      monopolists. Here is an example, taken from a multitude of
      others, of the &#8220;business&#8221; methods of the American trusts, quoted
      by Hilferding. In 1887,

  

Havemeyer founded the Sugar Trust by
      amalgamating fifteen small firms, whose total capital amounted
      to 6,500,000 dollars. Suitably &#8220;watered,&#8221; as the Americans say,
      the capital of the trust was declared to be 50 million
      dollars. This &#8220;overcapitalisation&#8221; anticipated the monopoly
      profits, in the same way as the United States Steel Corporation
      anticipates its monopoly profits in buying up as many iron ore
      fields as possible. In fact, the Sugar Trust set up monopoly
      prices, which secured it such profits that it could pay 10 per
      cent dividend on capital &#8220;watered&#8221; sevenfold, or about 70
      per cent on the capital actually invested at the time the trust
      was formed! In 1909, the capital of the Sugar Trust
      amounted to 90 million dollars. In twenty-two years, it had
      increased its capital more than tenfold.

In France the domination of the &#8220;financial oligarchy&#8221;
      (Against the Financial Oligarchy in France, the title
      of the well-known book by Lysis, the fifth edition of which was
      published in 1908) assumed a form that was only slightly
      different. Four of the most powerful banks enjoy, not a
      relative, but an &#8220;absolute monopoly&#8221; in the issue of bonds. In
      reality, this is a &#8220;trust of big banks.&#8221; And monopoly ensures
      monopoly profits from bond issues. Usually a borrowing country
      does not get more than 90 per cent of the sum of the loan, the
      remaining 10 per cent goes to the banks and other middlemen. The
      profit made by the banks out of the Russo-Chinese loan of 400
      million francs amounted to 8 per cent; out of the Russian (1904)
      loan of 800 million francs the profit amounted to 10 per cent;
      and out of the Moroccan (1904) loan of 62,500,000 francs it
      amounted to 18.75 per cent. Capitalism, which began its
      development with petty usury capital, is ending its development
      with gigantic usury capital. &#8220;The French,&#8221; says Lysis, &#8220;are the
      usurers of Europe.&#8221; All the conditions of economic life are
      being profoundly modified by this transformation of
      capitalism. With a stationary population, and stagnant industry,
      commerce and shipping, the &#8220;country&#8221; can grow rich by
      usury.  &#8220;Fifty persons, representing a capital of eight million
      francs, can control 2,000 million francs deposited in
      four banks.&#8221; The &#8220;holding system,&#8221; with which we are already
      familiar, leads to the same result. One of the biggest banks,
      the Soci&#233;t&#233; G&#233;n&#233;rale for instance, issues
      64,000

  

bonds for its &#8220;daughter company,&#8221; the Egyptian Sugar
      Refineries. The bonds are issued at 150 per cent, i.e., the bank
      gains 50 centimes on the franc. The dividends of the new company
      were found to be fictitious, the &#8220;public&#8221; lost from 90 to 100
      million francs. &#8220;One of the directors of the Soci&#233;t&#233;
      G&#233;n&#233;rale was a member of the board of directors of the
      Sugar Refineries.&#8221; It is not surprising that the author is
      driven to the conclusion that &#8220;the French Republic is a
      financial monarchy&#8221;; &#8220;it is the complete domination of the
      financial oligarchy; the latter dominates over the press and the
      government.&#8221;[9]

The extraordinarily high rate of profit obtained from the issue
      of bonds, which is one of the principal functions of finance
      capital, plays a very important part in the development and
      consolidation of the financial oligarchy. &#8220;There is not a single
      business of this type within the country that brings in profits
      even approximately equal to those obtained from the floatation
      of foreign loans,&#8221; says Die
Bank.[10]

&#8220;No banking operation brings in profits comparable with those
      obtained from the issue of securities!&#8221; According to the
      German Economist, the average annual profits made on
      the issue of industrial stock were as follows:

    
      
	  
	     
	    Per Cent
	  
	  
	    1895..............
	    38.6
	  
	  
	    1896..............
	    36.1
	  
	  
	    1897..............
	    66.7
	  
	  
	    1898..............
	    67.7
	  
	  
	    1899..............
	    66.9
	  
	  
	    1900..............
	    55.2
	  
      
    

&#8220;In the ten years from 1891 to 1900, more than a thousand
      million marks were &#8216;earned&#8217; by issuing German industrial
stock.&#8221;[11]

During periods of industrial boom, the profits of finance
      capital are immense, but during periods of depression,

  

small and
      unsound businesses go out of existence, and the big banks
      acquire &#8220;holdings&#8221; in them by buying them up for a mere song, or
      participate in profitable schemes for their &#8220;reconstruction&#8221; and
      &#8220;reorganisation.&#8221; In the &#8220;reconstruction&#8221; of undertakings which
      have been running at a loss, &#8220;the share capital is written down,
      that is, profits are distributed on a smaller capital and
      continue to be calculated on this smaller basis. Or, if the
      income has fallen to zero, new capital is called in, which,
      combined with the old and less remunerative capital, will bring
      in an adequate return.&#8221; &#8220;Incidentally,&#8221; adds Hilferding, &#8220;all
      these reorganisations and reconstructions have a twofold
      significance for the banks: first, as profitable transactions;
      and secondly, as opportunities for securing control of the
      companies in
difficulties.&#8221;[12]

Here is an instance. The Union Mining Company of Dortmund was
      founded in 1872. Share capital was issued to the amount of
      nearly 40 million marks and the market price of the shares rose
      to 170 after it had paid a 12 per cent dividend for its first
      year. Finance capital skimmed the cream and earned a trifle of
      something like 28 million marks. The principal sponsor of this
      company was that very big German Disconto-Gesellschaft which so
      successfully attained a capital of 300 million marks. Later, the
      dividends of the Union declined to nil; the shareholders had to
      consent to a &#8220;writing down&#8221; of capital, that is, to losing some
      of it in order not to lose it all. By a series of
      &#8220;reconstructions,&#8221; more than 73 million marks were written off
      the books of the Union in the course of thirty years. &#8220;At the
      present time, the original shareholders of the company possess
      only 5 per cent of the nominal value of their
shares&#8221;[13]

but the
      banks &#8220;earned something&#8221; out of every &#8220;reconstruction.&#8221;

Speculation in land situated in the suburbs of rapidly growing
      big towns is a particularly profitable operation for finance
      capital. The monopoly of the banks merges here with the monopoly
      of ground-rent and with monopoly of the means of communication,
      since the rise in the price of land and the possibility of
      selling it profitably in lots, etc., is mainly

  

dependent on good
      means of communication with the centre of the town; and these
      means of communication are in the hands of large companies which
      are connected with these same banks through the holding system
      and the distribution of seats on the boards. As a result we get
      what the German writer, L. Eschwege, a contributor to Die
      Bank who has made a special study of real estate business
      and mortgages, etc., calls a &#8220;bog.&#8221; Frantic speculation in
      suburban building lots; collapse of building enterprises like
      the Berlin firm of Boswau and Knauer, which acquired as much as
      100 million marks with the help of the &#8220;sound and solid&#8221;
      Deutsche Bank&#8212;the latter, of course, acting through the
      holding system, i.e., secretly, behind the scenes&#8212;and got
      out of it with a loss of &#8220;only&#8221; 12 million marks, then the ruin
      of small proprietors and of workers who get nothing from the
      fictitious building firms, fraudulent deals with the &#8220;honest&#8221;
      Berlin police and administration for the purpose of gaining
      control of the issue of cadastral certificates, building
      licences, etc.,
etc.[14]

&#8220;American ethics,&#8221; which the European professors and
      well-meaning bourgeois so hypocritically deplore, have, in the
      age of finance capital, become the ethics of literally every
      large city in any country.

At the beginning of 1914, there was talk in Berlin of the
      formation of a &#8220;transport trust,&#8221; i.e., of establishing
      &#8220;community of interests&#8221; between the three Berlin transport
      undertakings: the city electric railway, the tramway company and
      the omnibus company. &#8220;We have been aware,&#8221; wrote Die
      Bank, &#8220;that this plan was contemplated ever since it became
      known that the majority of the shares in the bus company had
      been acquired by the other two transport companies.... We may
      fully believe those who are pursuing this aim when they say that
      by uniting the transport services, they will secure economies,
      part of which will in time benefit the public. But the question
      is complicated by the fact that behind the transport trust that
      is being formed are the banks, which, if they desire, can
      subordinate the means of

  

transportation, which they have
      monopolised, to the interests of their real estate business. To
      be convinced of the reasonableness of such a conjecture, we need
      only recall that the interests of the big banks that encouraged
      the formation of the Electric Railway Company were already
      involved in it at the time the company was formed. That is to
      say: the interests of this transport undertaking were
      interlocked with the real estate interests. The point is that
      the eastern line of this railway was to run across land which
      this bank sold at an enormous profit for itself and for several
      partners in the transactions when it became certain the line was
      to be laid
down.&#8221;[15]

A monopoly, once it is formed and controls thousands of
      millions, inevitably penetrates into every sphere of
      public life, regardless of the form of government and all other
      &#8220;details.&#8221; In German economic literature one usually comes
      across obsequious praise of the integrity of the Prussian
      bureaucracy, and allusions to the French Panama
scandal[23] and to
      political corruption in America. But the fact is that even
      bourgeois literature devoted to German banking matters
      constantly has to go far beyond the field of purely banking
      operations; it speaks, for instance, about &#8220;the attraction of
      the banks&#8221; in reference to the increasing frequency with which
      public officials take employment with the banks, as follows:
      &#8220;How about the integrity of a state official who in his
      innermost heart is aspiring to a soft job in the
Behrenstrasse?&#8221;[16]

(The Berlin street where the head office of the Deutsche Bank is situated.)
In 1909, the publisher of Die Bank, Alfred Lansburgh, wrote an
article entitled &#8220;The Economic Significance of Byzantinism,&#8221; in which he
incidentally referred to Wilhelm&#160;II&#8217;s tour of Palestine, and to &#8220;the
immediate result of this journey, the construction of the Baghdad railway,
that fatal &#8216;great product of German enterprise&#8217;, which is more responsible
for the &#8216;encirclement&#8217; than all our political blunders put
      together&#8221;.[17]

(By encirclement is meant the
      policy of Edward&#160;VII

  

to isolate Germany and surround her with an
      imperialist anti-German alliance.) In 1911, Eschwege, the
      contributor to this same magazine to whom I have already
      referred, wrote an article entitled &#8220;Plutocracy and
      Bureaucracy,&#8221; in which he exposed, for example, the case of a
      German official named V&#246;lker, who was a zealous member of
      the Cartel Committee and who, it turned out some time later,
      obtained a lucrative post in the biggest cartel, the Steel
      Syndicate. Similar cases, by no means casual, forced this
      bourgeois author to admit that &#8220;the economic liberty guaranteed
      by the German Constitution has become in many departments of
      economic life, a meaningless phrase&#8221; and that under the existing
      rule of the plutocracy, &#8220;even the widest political liberty
      cannot save us from being converted into a nation of unfree
      people.&#8221;[18]

As for Russia, I shall confine myself to one example. Some years
      ago, all the newspapers announced that Davydov, the director of
      the Credit Department of the Treasury, had resigned his post to
      take employment with a certain big bank at a salary which,
      according to the contract, would total over one million rubles
      in the course of several years. The Credit Department is an
      institution, the function of which is to &#8220;co-ordinate the
      activities of all the credit institutions of the country&#8221; and
      which grants subsidies to banks in St. Petersburg and Moscow
      amounting to between 800 and 1,000 million
rubles.&#8221;[19]

It is characteristic of capitalism in general that the ownership
      of capital is separated from the application of capital to
      production, that money capital is separated from industrial or
      productive capital, and that the rentier who lives entirely on
      income obtained from money capital, is separated from the
      entrepreneur and from all who are directly concerned in the
      management of capital. Imperialism, or the domination of finance
      capital, is that highest stage of capitalism in which this
      separation reaches vast proportions. The supremacy of finance
      capital over all other forms of capital means the predominance
      of the rentier and

  

of the financial oligarchy; it means that a
      small number of financially &#8220;powerful&#8221; states stand out among
      all the rest. The extent to which this process is going on may
      be judged from the statistics on emissions, i.e., the issue of
      all kinds of securities.

In the Bulletin of the International Statistical
      Institute,
A.&#160;Neymarck[20]

has published very comprehensive,
      complete and comparative figures covering the issue of
      securities all over the world, which have been repeatedly quoted
      in part in economic literature. The following are the totals he
      gives for four decades:

    
      
	  
	    TOTAL ISSUES IN FRANCS PER
	      DECADE
(000,000,000)

	  
	  
	    1871-80..............
	    76.1
	  
	  
	    1881-90.............
	    64.5
	  
	  
	    1891-1900.........
	    100.4
	  
	  
	    1901-10............
	    197.8
	  
      
    

In the 1870s the total amount of issues for the whole world was
      high, owing particularly to the loans floated in connection
      with the Franco-Prussian War, and the company-promotion boom
      which set in in Germany after the war. On the whole, the
      increase was relatively not very rapid during the three last
      decades of the nineteenth century, and only in the first ten
      years of the twentieth century is an enormous increase of almost
      100 per cent to be observed. Thus the beginning of the twentieth
      century marks the turning-point, not only in the growth of
      monopolies (cartels, syndicates, trusts), of which we have
      already spoken, but also in the growth of finance capital.

Neymarck estimates the total amount of issued securities current
      in the world in 1910 at about 815,000 million francs. Deducting
      from this sum amounts which might have been duplicated, he
      reduces the total to 575,000-600,000 million,

  

which is
      distributed among the various countries as follows (I take
      600,000 million):

    
      
	  
	    FINANCIAL SECURITIES CURRENT
	      IN 1910
(000,000,000 francs)

	  
	  
	    Great Britain
	    142
	    Holland
	    12.5
	  
	  
	    United States
	    132
	    Belgium
	    7.5
	  
	  
	    France
	    110
	    Spain
	    7.5
	  
	  
	    Germany
	    95
	    Switzerland
	    6.25
	  
	  
	    Russia
	    31
	    Denmark
	    3.75
	  
	  
	    Austria-Hungary
	    24
	    Sweden, 
Norway,
Rumania,
etc.
	    2.5
	  
	  
	    Italy
	    14
	  
	  
	    Japan
	    12
	  
      
    

From these figures we at once see standing out in sharp relief
      four of the richest capitalist countries, each of which holds
      securities to amounts ranging approximately from 100,000 to
      150,000 million francs. Of these four countries, two, Britain
      and France, are the oldest capitalist countries, and, as we
      shall see, possess the most colonies; the other two, the United
      States and Germany, are capitalist countries leading in the
      rapidity of development and the degree of extension of
      capitalist monopolies in industry. Together, these four
      countries own 479,000 million francs, that is, nearly 80 per
      cent of the world&#8217;s finance capital. In one way or another,
      nearly the whole of the rest of the world is more or less the
      debtor to and tributary of these international banker countries,
      these four &#8220;pillars&#8221; of world finance capital.

It is particularly important to examine the part which the
      export of capital plays in creating the international network of
      dependence on and connections of finance capital.
 

     

    

    Notes

     

[1]

R. Hilferding, Finance Capital, Moscow, 1912 (in
      Russian), pp. 338-39.
&#8212;Lenin

[2]

R. Liefmann, op. cit., S. 476.
&#8212;Lenin

[3]

Hans
      Gideon Heymann, Die gemischten Werke im deutschen
      Grosseisengewerbe Stuttgart, 1904, S. 268-69.
&#8212;Lenin

[4]

Liefmann, Beteiligungsgesellschaften, etc., S. 258 of
      the first edition.
&#8212;Lenin

[5]

Schulze-Gaevernitz in Grundriss der
      Sozial&ouml;konomik, V, 2, S. 110.
 &#8212;Lenin

[6]

L. Eschwege, &#8220;Tochtergesellschaften&#8221; in Die Bank, 1914,
      S.545
&#8212;Lenin

[7]

Kurt
      Heinig, &#8220;Der Weg des Elecktrotrusts&#8221; in Die Neue Zeit,
      1912, 30. S. 484
&#8212;Lenin

[8]

E. Agahd, Grossbanken und Weltmarkt. Die wirstschaftliche
      und politische Bedeutung der Grossbanken im Weltmarkt unter
      Ber&uuml;chsichtigung ihres Einflusses auf Russlands
      Volkswirtscahft und die deutsche-russichen Beziehungen,
      Berlin, 1914
&#8212;Lenin

[9]

Lysis,
      Contre l&#8217;oligarchie financi&egrave;re en France, 5
      ed. Paris, 1908, pp. 11, 12, 26, 39, 40, 48.
&#8212;Lenin

[10]

Die Bank, 1913, No. 7, S. 630.
&#8212;Lenin

[11]

Stillich, op. cit., S. 143, also W. Sombart, Die deutsche
      Volkswirtschaft im 19. jahrhundert, 2. Aufl., 1909, S. 526,
      Anlage 8.
&#8212;Lenin

[12]

Finance Capital, p. 172.
&#8212;Lenin

[13]

Stillich, op. cit., S. 138 and Liefmann, op. cit., S. 51.
&#8212;Lenin

[14]

In
      Die Bank, 1913, S. 952, L. Eschwege, Der
      Sumpf; ibid., 1912, 1, S. 223 et seq.
&#8212;Lenin

[15]

&#8220;Verkehrstrust&#8221; in Die Bank, 1914, 1, S. 89.
&#8212;Lenin

[16]

&#8220;Der Zug zur Bank&#8221; in Die Bank, 1909, 1, S. 79.
&#8212;Lenin

[17]

ibid., S. 301.
&#8212;Lenin

[18]

ibid., 1911, 2, S. 825; 1913, 2, S. 962.
&#8212;Lenin

[19]

E. Agahd, op. cit., S. 202.
&#8212;Lenin

[20]

Bulletin de l&#8217;institut international de statistique,
      t. XIX, livr. II, La  Haye, 1912. Data concerning small states,
      second column, are estimated by adding 20 per cent to the 1902
      figures.
&#8212;Lenin

     

[21]
[PLACEHOLDER.]

[22]
[PLACEHOLDER.]

[23]
[PLACEHOLDER.]

    

     

            
          

II. BANKS AND THEIR NEW ROLE

          |

          

IV. EXPORT OF CAPITAL

            

           

    

    
      
	

	  

	    
	      <
		  backward

	       &#160; &#160; 
	      Contents
	       &#160; &#160; 

	      forward >
	    

	  
	  

	    
	      Works
		  Index   |  

	      Volume 22
	    

	     | 

	    
	      Collected Works

	        |   L.I.A. Index
	    
	  
	
      
    

    &#160;


## ch04

Lenin: 1916/imp-hsc: IV. EXPORT OF CAPITAL

    
	
    
    

    
    
  

  

    Vladimir Ilyich Lenin

    Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism

    A POPULAR OUTLINE

    

    

 

		IV. EXPORT OF CAPITAL

Typical of the old capitalism, when free competition held
      undivided sway, was the export of goods. Typical of the latest
      stage of capitalism, when monopolies rule, is the export of
      capital.

Capitalism is commodity production at its highest stage of
      development, when labour-power itself becomes a commodity. The
      growth of internal exchange, and, particularly,

 

of international
      exchange, is a characteristic feature of capitalism. The uneven
      and spasmodic development of individual enterprises, individual
      branches of industry and individual countries is inevitable
      under the capitalist system. England became a capitalist country
      before any other, and by the middle of the nineteenth century,
      having adopted free trade, claimed to be the &#8220;workshop of the
      world,&#8221; the supplier of manufactured goods to all countries,
      which in exchange were to keep her provided with raw
      materials. But in the last quarter of the nineteenth century,
      this monopoly was already undermined; for other countries,
      sheltering themselves with
      &#8220;protective&#8221; tariffs, developed into independent capitalist
      states. On the threshold of the twentieth century we see the
      formation of a new type of monopoly: firstly, monopolist
      associations of capitalists in all capitalistically developed
      countries; secondly, the monopolist position of a few very rich
      countries, in which the accumulation of capital has reached
      gigantic proportions. An enormous &#8220;surplus of capital&#8221;  has
      arisen in the advanced countries.

It goes without saying that if capitalism could develop
      agriculture, which today is everywhere lagging terribly behind
      industry, if it could raise the living standards of the masses,
      who in spite of the amazing technical progress are everywhere
      still half-starved and poverty-stricken, there could be no
      question of a surplus of capital. This &#8220;argument&#8221; is very often
      advanced by the petty-bourgeois critics of capitalism. But if
      capitalism did these things it would not be capitalism; for both
      uneven development and a semi-starvation level of existence of
      the masses are fundamental and inevitable conditions and
      constitute premises of this mode of production. As long as
      capitalism remains what it is, surplus capital will be utilised
      not for the purpose of raising the standard of living of the
      masses in a given country, for this would mean a decline in
      profits for the capitalists, but for the purpose of increasing
      profits by exporting capital abroad to the backward
      countries. In these backward countries profits are usually high,
      for capital is scarce, the price of land is relatively low,
      wages are low, raw materials are cheap. The export of capital is
      made possible by a number of backward countries having already
      been drawn into

  

world capitalist intercourse; main railways have
      either been or are being built in those countries, elementary
      conditions for industrial development have been created,
      etc. The need to export capital arises from the fact that in a
      few countries capitalism has become &#8220;overripe&#8221; and (owing to the
      backward state of agriculture and the poverty of the masses)
      capital cannot find a field for &#8220;profitable&#8221; investment.

Here are approximate figures showing the amount of capital
      invested abroad by the three principal
countries[1]:

    
      
	  
	    CAPITAL INVESTED
	      ABROAD
(000,000,000 francs)
	  
	  
	    Year
	    Great Britain
	    France
	    Germany
	  
	  
	    1862.....
	    3.6
	    &#8212;
	    &#8212;
	  
	  
	    1872.....
	    15.0
	    10 (1869)
	    &#8212;
	  
	  
	    1882.....
	    22.0
	    15(1880)
	    ?
	  
	  
	    1893.....
	    42.0
	    20(1890)
	    ?
	  
	  
	    1902.....
	    62.0
	    27-37
	    12.5

	  
	  
	    1914.....
	    75-100.0
	    00
	    44.0
	  
      
    

This table shows that the export of capital reached enormous
      dimensions only at the beginning of the twentieth
      century. Before the war the capital invested abroad by the three
      principal countries amounted to between 175,000 million and
      200,000 million francs. At the modest rate of 5 per cent, the
      income from this sum should reach from 8,000 to 10,000 million
      francs a year&#8212;a sound basis for the imperialist
      oppression and exploitation of most of the countries and nations
      of the world, for the capitalist parasitism of a handful of
      wealthy states!

How is this capital invested abroad distributed among the
      various countries? Where is it invested? Only an
      approximate answer can be given to these questions, but it is
      one sufficient to throw light on certain general relations and
      connections of modern imperialism.

    
      
	  
	    DISTRIBUTION (APPROXIMATE) OF
	      FOREIGN
CAPITAL IN DIFFERENT PARTS OF THE
	      GLOBE
(circa 1910)
	  

	  
	     
	    Great 
Britain
	    France
	    Germany
	    Total
	  
	  
	     
	     
	    (000,000,000 marks)
	     
	  
	  
	    Europe..........
	    4
	    23
	    18
	    45
	  
	  
	    America..........
	    37
	    4
	    10
	    51
	  
	  
	    Asia, Africa, and Australia......
	    29
	    8
	    7
	    44
	  
	  
	     
	     
	     
	     
	     
	  
	  
	    Total........
	    70
	    35
	    35
	    140
	  
      
    

The principal spheres of investment of British capital are the
      British colonies, which are very large also in America (for
      example, Canada), not to mention Asia, etc. In this case,
      enormous exports of capital are bound up most closely with vast
      colonies, of the importance of which for imperialism I shall
      speak later. In the case of France the situation is
      different. French capital exports are invested mainly in Europe,
      primarily in Russia (at least ten thousand million francs). This
      is mainly loan capital, government loans, and not capital
      invested in industrial undertakings. Unlike British colonial
      imperialism, French imperialism might be termed usury
      imperialism. In the case of Germany, we have a third type;
      colonies are inconsiderable, and German capital invested abroad
      is divided most evenly between Europe and America.

The export of capital influences and greatly accelerates the
      development of capitalism in those countries to which it is
      exported. While, therefore, the export of capital may tend to a
      certain extent to arrest development in the capital-exporting
      countries, it can only do so by expanding and deepening the
      further development of capitalism throughout the world.

The capital-exporting countries are nearly always able to obtain
      certain &#8220;advantages,&#8221; the character of which throws light on the
      peculiarity of the epoch of finance capital and

 

monopoly. The
      following passage, for instance, appeared in the Berlin review,
      Die Bank, for October 1913:

&#8220;A comedy worthy of the pen of Aristophanes is lately being
      played on the international capital market. Numerous foreign
      countries, from Spain to the Balkan states, from Russia to
      Argentina, Brazil and China, are openly or secretly coming into
      the big money market with demands, sometimes very persistent,
      for loans. The money markets are not very bright at the moment
      and the political outlook is not promising. But not a single
      money market dares to refuse a loan for fear that its neighbour
      may forestall it, consent to grant a loan and so secure some
      reciprocal service. In these international transactions the
      creditor nearly always manages to secure some extra benefit: a
      favourable clause in a commercial treaty, a coating station, a
      contract to construct a harbour, a fat concession, or an order
      for
guns.&#8221;[2]

Finance capital has created the epoch of monopolies, and
      monopolies introduce everywhere monopolist principles: the
      utilisation of &#8220;connections&#8221; for profitable transactions takes
      the place of competition on the open market. The most usual
      thing is to stipulate that part of the loan granted shall be
      spent on purchases in the creditor country, particularly on
      orders for war materials, or for ships, etc. In the course of
      the last two decades (1890-1910), France has very often resorted
      to this method. The export of capital thus becomes a means of
      encouraging the export of commodities. In this connection,
      transactions between particularly big firms assume a form which,
      as
Schilder[3]

&#8220;mildly&#8221; puts it, &#8220;borders on
      corruption.&#8221; Krupp in Germany, Schneider in France, Armstrong in
      Britain are instances of firms which have close connections with
      powerful banks and governments and which cannot easily be
      &#8220;ignored&#8221; when a loan is being arranged.

France, when granting loans to Russia, &#8220;squeezed&#8221; her in the
      commercial treaty of September 16, 1905, stipulating for certain
      concessions to run till 1917. She did the same in the commercial
      treaty with Japan of August 19, 1911. The tariff war between
      Austria and Serbia, which lasted,

 

with a seven months&#8217; interval,
      from 1906 to 1911, was partly caused by Austria and France
      competing to supply Serbia with war materials. In January 1912,
      Paul Deschanel stated in the Chamber of Deputies that from 1908
      to 1911 French firms had supplied war materials to Serbia to the
      value of 45 million francs.

A report from the Austro-Hungarian Consul at San-Paulo (Brazil)
      states: &#8220;The Brazilian railways are being built chiefly by
      French, Belgian, British and German capital. In the financial
      operations connected with the construction of these railways the
      countries involved stipulate for orders for the necessary
      railway materials.&#8221;

Thus finance capital, literally, one might say, spreads its net
      over all countries of the world. An important role in this is
      played by banks founded in the colonies and by their
      branches. German imperialists look with envy at the &#8220;old&#8221;
      colonial countries which have been particularly &#8220;successful&#8221; in
      providing for themselves in this respect. In 1904, Great Britain
      had 50 colonial banks with 2,279 branches (in 1910 there were 72
      banks with 5,449 branches), France had 20 with 136 branches;
      Holland, 16 with 68 branches; and Germany had &#8220;only&#8221; 13 with 70
      branches.[4]

The American capitalists, in their
      turn, are jealous of the English and German: &#8220;In South America,&#8221;
      they complained in 1915, &#8220;five German banks have forty branches
      and five British banks have seventy branches.... Britain and
      Germany have invested in Argentina, Brazil, and Uruguay in the
      last twenty-five years approximately four thousand million
      dollars, and as a result together enjoy 46 per cent of the total
      trade of these three
countries.&#8221;[5]

The capital-exporting countries have divided the world among
      themselves in the figurative sense of the term. But finance
      capital has led to the actual division of the world.

 

     

    

    Notes

     

[1]

Hobson, Imperialism, London, 1902, p. 58; Riesser,
      op. cit., S. 395 und

      404; P. Arndt in Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, Bd. 7,
      1916, S. 35; Neymarck in

      Bulletin; Hilferding, Finance Capital, p. 492;
      Lloyd George, Speech in the House of Commons, May 4,
      1915. reported in the Daily Telegraph, May 5, 1915;
      B. Harms, Probleme der Weltwirtschaft , Jena, 1912,
      S. 235 et seq.;

      Dr. Siegmund Schilder, Entwicklungstendenzen der
      Weltwirtschaft, Berlin, 1912, Band 1, S. 150; George Paish,
      &#8220;Great Britain&#8217;s Capital Investments, etc.&#8221;, in Journal of
      the Royal Statistical Society, Vol. LXXIV, 1910-11, P. 167
      et seq.; Georges Diouritch, L&#8217;Expansion des banques
      allemandes a l&#8217;&egrave;tranger, ses rapports avec le
      d&eacute;veloppement &eacute;conomique de l&#8217;Allemagne,
      Paris, 1909, p. 84.
&#8212;Lenin

[2]

 Die
      Bank, 1913, 2, S. 1024-25.
&#8212;Lenin

[3]

Schilder, op. cit., S. 346, 350, 371.
&#8212;Lenin

[4]

Riesser, op. cit., 4th ed., S. 375; Diouritch, p. 283.
&#8212;Lenin

[5]

The
      Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social
      Science, Vol. LIX, May 1915, p. 301. In the same volume on
      p. 3.31, we read that the well-known statistician Paish, in the
      last issue of the financial magazine The Statist,
      estimated the amount of capital exported by Britain, Germany,
      France, Belgium and Holland at $40,000 million, i.e., 200,000
      million francs.
&#8212;Lenin

     

    

     

            
          

III. FINANCE CAPITAL AND THE FINANCIAL OLIGARCHY

          |

          

V. DIVISION OF THE WORLD AMONG CAPITALIST ASSOCIATIONS

            

           

    

    
      
	

	  

	    
	      <
		  backward

	       &#160; &#160; 
	      Contents
	       &#160; &#160; 

	      forward >
	    

	  
	  

	    
	      Works
		  Index   |  

	      Volume 22
	    

	     | 

	    
	      Collected Works

	        |   L.I.A. Index
	    
	  
	
      
    

    &#160;


## ch05

Lenin: 1916/imp-hsc: V. DIVISION OF THE WORLD AMONG CAPITALIST ASSOCIATIONS

    
	
    
    

    
    
  

  

    Vladimir Ilyich Lenin

    Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism

    A POPULAR OUTLINE

    

    

   

    V. DIVISION OF THE WORLD AMONG CAPITALIST ASSOCIATIONS

Monopolist capitalist associations, cartels, syndicates and
      trusts first divided the home market among themselves and
      obtained more or less complete possession of the industry of
      their own country. But under capitalism the home market is
      inevitably bound up with the foreign market. Capitalism long ago
      created a world market. As the export of capital increased, and
      as the foreign and colonial connections and &#8220;spheres of
      influence&#8221; of the big monopolist associations expanded in all
      ways, things &#8220;naturally&#8221; gravitated towards an international
      agreement among these associations, and towards the formation of
      international cartels.

This is a new stage of world concentration of capital and
      production, incomparably higher than the preceding stages. Let
      us see how this supermonopoly develops.

The electrical industry is highly typical of the latest
      technical achievements and is most typical of capitalism at the
      end of the nineteenth and the beginning of the twentieth
      centuries. This industry has developed most in the two leaders
      of the new capitalist countries, the United States and
      Germany. In Germany, the crisis of 1900 gave a particularly
      strong impetus to its concentration. During the crisis, the
      banks, which by that time had become fairly well merged with
      industry, enormously accelerated and intensified the ruin of
      relatively small firms and their absorption by the large
      ones. &#8220;The banks,&#8221; writes Jeidels, &#8220;refused a helping hand to
      the very firms in greatest need of capital, and brought on first
      a frenzied boom and then the hopeless failure of the companies
      which had not been connected with them closely
enough.&#8221; [1]

As a result, after 1900, concentration in Germany progressed
      with giant strides. Up to 1900 there had been seven or eight
      &#8220;groups&#8221; in the electrical industry. Each consisted of several
      companies (altogether there were 28) and each was backed by from
      2 to 11 banks. Between 1908 and 1912 all these groups were
      merged into two, or one. The following diagram shows the
      process:

   

    
      
	  
	    GROUPS IN THE ELECTRICAL INDUSTRY
	  
	  
	    Prior to 1900: Felten &
	      Lahmeyer; Guillaume
|
|

	    Union A.E.G.
|
|
	    Siemens Schuckert
&
	      Halske & Co.
|

	    Berg-
mann
|
	    Kum-
mer
|
	  
	  
	    |
|
Felten &
	      Lahmeyer

|_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_

	    |
A.E.G.
(G.E.C.)

_-_-_-_-_-_-_-|

	    |
|
Siemens &
	      Halske-
Schuckert
|_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_

	    |
|
Berg-
man
_-_-_-_-_-|
	    |
|
Failed in 
1900

	  
	  
	    By 1912:
	    A.E.G. (G.E.C.) Siemens &
	      Halske Schuckert

	  
	  
	     
	    (in close
	      "co-operation" since 1908)

	  
      
    

The famous A.E.G. (General Electric Company), which grew up in
      this way, controls 175 to 200 companies (through the &#8220;holding&#8221;
      system), and a total capital of approximately 1,500
      million marks. Of direct agencies abroad alone, it has
      thirty-four, of which twelve are joint-stock companies, in more
      than ten countries. As early as 1904 the amount of capital
      invested abroad by the German electrical industry was estimated
      at 233 million marks. Of this sum, 62 million were invested in
      Russia. Needless to say, the A.E.G. is a huge &#8220;combine&#8221;&#8212;its
      manufacturing companies alone number no less than sixteen&#8212;producing
      the most diverse articles, from cables and
      insulators to motor-cars and flying machines.

But concentration in Europe was also a component part of the
      process of concentration in America, which developed in the
      following way:

    
      
	  
	     
	    General Electric Company
	  
	  
	    
	      United States:
	    
	    Thomas-Houston Co.
establishes a firm
	      in
Europe

	    Edison Co. establishes in Eu-
rope the
	      French Edison Co.
which transfers its patents to
the
	      German firm

	  
	  
	    
	      Germany:
	    
	    Union Electric Co.
	    General Electric Co. (A.E.G.)
	  
      
    

Thus, two electrical &#8220;great powers&#8221; were formed: &#8220;there
      are no other electrical companies in the world
      completely independent of them,&#8221; wrote Heinig in his
      article &#8220;The Path of the Electric Trust.&#8221; An idea, although far
      from complete, of the turnover and the size of the enterprises
      of the two &#8220;trusts&#8221; can be obtained from the following figures:

   

    
      
	  
	     
	    Turnover
(000,000
marks)

	    Number of
employees
	    Net profits
(000,000
marks)
	  
	  
	    America: General Electric
	      Co:
(G.E.C)

	     
	     
	     
	  
	  
	    1907
1910

	    252
298
	    28,000
32,000
	    35.4
45.6
	  
	  
	    Germany: General Electric
	      Co:
(A.E.G.)

	     
	     
	     
	  
	  
	    1907
1911
	    216
362
	    30,700
60,800
	    14.5
21.7
	  
      
    

And then, in 1907, the German and American trusts concluded an
      agreement by which they divided the world between
      them. Competition between them ceased. The American General
      Electric Company (G.E.C.) &#8220;got&#8221; the United States and
      Canada. The German General Electric Company (A.E.G.) &#8220;got&#8221;
      Germany, Austria, Russia, Holland, Denmark, Switzerland, Turkey
      and the Balkans. Special agreements, naturally secret, were
      concluded regarding the penetration of &#8220;daughter companies&#8221; into
      new branches of industry, into &#8220;new&#8221; countries formally not yet
      allotted. The two trusts were to exchange inventions and
      experiments. [2]

The difficulty of competing against this trust, actually a
      single world-wide trust controlling a capital of several
      thousand million, with &#8220;branches&#8221;, agencies, representatives,
      connections, etc., in every corner of the world, is
      self-evident. But the division of the world between two powerful
      trusts does not preclude redivision if the relation of forces
      changes as a result of uneven development, war, bankruptcy, etc.

An instructive example of an attempt at such a redivision, of
      the struggle for redivision, is provided by the oil industry.

&#8220;The world oil market,&#8221; wrote Jeidels in 1905, &#8220;is even today
      still divided between two great financial groups&#8212;Rockefeller&#8217;s American Standard Oil Co., and Rothschild and
      Nobel, the controlling interests of the Russian oilfields in
      Baku. The two groups are closely connected. But for several
      years five enemies have been threatening their
monopoly&#8221;:[3]

(1) the
      exhaustion of the American oilfields;
   

(2) the competition of the
      firm of Mantashev of Baku;
(3) the Austrian oilfields;
(4) the
      Rumanian oilfields;
(5) the overseas oilfields, particularly in
      the Dutch colonies (the extremely rich firms, Samuel and Shell,
      also connected with British capital). The three last groups are
      connected with the big German banks, headed by the huge Deutsche
      Bank. These banks independently and systematically developed the
      oil industry in Rumania, for example, in order to have a
      foothold of their &#8220;own.&#8221; In 1907, the foreign capital invested
      in the Rumanian oil industry was estimated at 185 million
      francs, of which 74 million was German
capital. [4]

A struggle began for the &#8220;division of the world&#8221;, as, in fact,
      it is called in economic literature. On the one hand, the
      Rockefeller &#8220;oil trust&#8221; wanted to lay its hands on
      everything; it formed a &#8220;daughter company&#8221; right
      in Holland, and bought up oilfields in the Dutch Indies, in
      order to strike at its principal enemy, the Anglo-Dutch Shell
      trust. On the other hand, the Deutsche Bank and the other German
      banks aimed at &#8220;retaining&#8221; Rumania &#8220;for themselves&#8221; and at
      uniting her with Russia against Rockefeller. The latter
      possessed far more capital and an excellent system of oil
      transportation and distribution. The struggle had to end, and
      did end in 1907, with the utter defeat of the Deutsche Bank,
      which was confronted with the alternative: either to liquidate
      its &#8220;oil interests&#8221; and lose millions, or submit. It chose to
      submit, and concluded a very disadvantageous agreement with the
      &#8220;oil trust.&#8221;  The Deutsche Bank agreed &#8220;not to attempt anything
      which might injure American interests.&#8221; Provision was made,
      however, for the annulment of the agreement in the event of
      Germany establishing a state oil monopoly.

Then the &#8220;comedy of oil&#8221; began. One of the German finance kings,
      von Gwinner, a director of the Deutsche Bank, through his
      private secretary, Stauss, launched a campaign for a
      state oil monopoly. The gigantic machine of the huge German bank
      and all its wide &#8220;connections&#8221; were set in motion. The press
      bubbled over with &#8220;patriotic&#8221; indignation against the &#8220;yoke&#8221; of
      the American trust, and, on March 15, 1911, the Reichstag, by an
      almost unanimous vote, adopted

   

a motion asking the government to
      introduce a bill for the establishment of an oil monopoly. The
      government seized upon this &#8220;popular&#8221; idea, and the game of the
      Deutsche Bank, which hoped to cheat its American counterpart and
      improve its business by a state monopoly, appeared to have been
      won. The German oil magnates already saw visions of enormous
      profits, which would not be less than those of the Russian sugar
      refiners.... But, firstly, the big German banks quarrelled among
      themselves over the division of the spoils. The
      Disconto-Gesellschaft exposed the covetous aims of the Deutsche
      Bank; secondly, the government took fright at the prospect of a
      struggle with Rockefeller, for it was very doubtful whether
      Germany could be sure of obtaining oil from other sources (the
      Rumanian output was small); thirdly, just at that time the 1913
      credits of a thousand million marks were voted for Germany&#8217;s war
      preparations. The oil monopoly project was postponed. The
      Rockefeller &#8220;oil trust&#8221; came out of the struggle, for the time
      being, victorious.

The Berlin review, Die Bank, wrote in this connection
      that
      Germany could fight the oil trust only by establishing an
      electricity monopoly and by converting water-power into cheap
      electricity. &#8220;But,&#8221; the author added, &#8220;the electricity monopoly
      will come when the producers need it, that is to say, when the
      next great crash in the electrical industry is imminent, and
      when the gigantic, expensive power stations now being put up at
      great cost everywhere by private electrical concerns, which are
      already obtaining certain franchises from towns, from states,
      etc., can no
      longer work at a profit. Water-power will then have to be
      used. But it will be impossible to convert it into cheap
      electricity at state expense; it will also have to be handed
      over to a &#8216;private monopoly controlled by the state&#8217;, because
      private industry has already concluded a number of contracts and
      has stipulated for heavy compensation.... So it was with the
      nitrate monopoly, so it is with the oil monopoly, so it will be
      with the electric power monopoly. It is time our state
      socialists, who allow themselves to be blinded by a beautiful
      principle, understood, at last, that in Germany the monopolies
      have never pursued the aim, nor have they had the result, of
      benefiting the consumer, or even of handing over to the state
      part of the promoter&#8217;s profits; they have served

   

only to
      facilitate, at the expense of the state, the recovery of private
      industries which were on the verge of
bankruptcy. [5]

Such are the valuable admissions which the German bourgeois
      economists are forced to make. We see plainly here how private
      and state monopolies are interwoven in the epoch of finance
      capital; how both are but separate links in the imperialist
      struggle between the big monopolists for the division of the
      world.

In merchant shipping, the tremendous development of
      concentration has ended also in the division of the world. In
      Germany two powerful companies have come to the fore: the
      Hamburg-Amerika and the Norddeutscher Lloyd, each having a
      capital of 200 million marks (in stocks and bonds) and
      possessing shipping tonnage to the value of 185 to 189 million
      marks. On the other hand, in America, on January 1, 1903, the
      International Mercantile Marine Co., known as the Morgan trust,
      was formed; it united nine American and British steamship
      companies, and possessed a capital of 120 million dollars (480
      million marks). As early as 1903, the German giants and this
      American-British trust concluded an agreement to divide the
      world with a consequent division of profits. The German
      companies undertook not to compete in the Anglo-American
      traffic. Which ports were to be &#8220;allotted&#8221; to each was precisely
      stipulated; a joint committee of control was set up, etc. This
      agreement was concluded for twenty years, with the prudent
      provision for its annulment in the event of
war. [6]

Extremely instructive also is the story of the formation of the
      International Rail Cartel. The first attempt of the British,
      Belgian and German rail manufacturers to form such a cartel was
      made as early as 1884, during a severe industrial
      depression. The manufacturers agreed not to compete with one
      another in the home markets of the countries involved, and they
      divided the foreign markets in the following quotas: Great
      Britain, 66 per cent; Germany, 27 per cent; Belgium, 7 per
      cent. India was reserved entirely for Great Britain. Joint war
      was declared against a British firm which remained outside the
      cartel, the cost of which

   

was met by a percentage levy on all
      sales. But in 1886 the cartel collapsed when two British firms
      retired from it. It is characteristic that agreement could not
      be achieved during subsequent boom periods.

At the beginning of 1904, the German steel syndicate was
      formed. In November 1904, the International Rail Cartel was
      revived, with the following quotas: Britain, 53.5 per cent;
      Germany, 28.83 per cent; Belgium, 17.67 per cent. France came in
      later and received 4.8 per cent, 5.8 per cent and 6.4 per cent
      in the first, second and third year respectively, over and above
      the 100 per cent limit, i.e., out of a total of 104.8 per cent,
      etc. In 1905, the United States Steel Corporation entered the
      cartel; then Austria and Spain. &#8220;At the present time,&#8221; wrote
      Vogelstein
      in 1910, &#8220;the division of the world is complete, and the big
      consumers, primarily the state railways&#8212;since the world
      has been parcelled out without consideration for their
      interests&#8212;can now dwell like the poet in the heavens of
Jupiter.&#8221; [7]

Let me also mention the International Zinc Syndicate which was
      established in 1909 and which precisely apportioned output among
      five groups of factories: German, Belgian, French, Spanish and
      British; and also the International Dynamite Trust, which,
      Liefmann says, is &#8220;quite a modern, close alliance of all the
      German explosives manufacturers who, with the French and
      American dynamite manufacturers, organised in a similar manner,
      have divided the whole world among themselves, so to
speak.&#8221;[8]

Liefmann calculated that in 1897 there were altogether about
      forty international cartels in which Germany had a share, while
      in 1910 there were about a hundred.

Certain bourgeois writers (now joined by Karl Kautsky, who has
      completely abandoned the Marxist position he had held, for
      example, in 1909) have expressed the opinion that international
      cartels, being one of the most striking expressions of the
      internationalisation of capital, give the hope of peace among
      nations under capitalism. Theoretically, this opinion is
      absolutely absurd, while in practice it is sophistry and a
      dishonest defence of the worst opportunism.

   

International
      cartels show to what point capitalist monopolies have developed,
      and the object of the struggle
      between the various capitalist associations. This last
      circumstance is the most important; it alone shows us the
      historico-economic meaning of what is taking place; for the
      forms of the struggle may and do constantly change in
      accordance with varying, relatively specific and temporary
      causes, but the substance of the struggle, its class
      content, positively cannot change while
      classes exist. Naturally, it is in the interests of, for
      example, the German bourgeoisie, to whose side Kautsky has in
      effect gone over in his theoretical arguments (I shall deal with
      this later), to obscure the substance of the present
      economic struggle (the division of the world) and to emphasise
      now this and now another form of the struggle. Kautsky
      makes the same mistake. Of course, we have in mind not only the
      German bourgeoisie, but the bourgeoisie all over the world. The
      capitalists divide the world, not out of any particular malice,
      but because the degree of concentration which has been reached
      forces them to adopt this method in order to obtain profits. And
      they divide it &#8220;in proportion to capital&#8221;, &#8220;in proportion to
      strength,&#8221; because there cannot be any other method of division
      under commodity production and capitalism. But strength varies
      with the degree of economic and political development. In order
      to understand what is taking place, it is necessary to know what
      questions are settled by the changes in strength. The question
      as to whether these changes are &#8220;purely&#8221; economic or
      non-economic (e.g., military) is a secondary one, which cannot
      in the least affect fundamental views on the latest epoch of
      capitalism. To substitute the question of the form of the
      struggle and agreements (today peaceful, tomorrow warlike, the
      next day warlike again) for the question of the substance of the
      struggle and agreements between capitalist associations is to
      sink to the role of a sophist.

The epoch of the latest stage of capitalism shows us that
      certain relations between capitalist associations grow up,
      based on the economic division of the world; while
      parallel to and in connection with it, certain relations grow up
      between political alliances, between states, on the basis of the
      territorial division of the world, of the struggle for colonies,
      of the &#8220;struggle for spheres of influence.&#8221;

   

     

    

    Notes

     

[1]

Jeidels, op. cit., S. 232.
&#8212;Lenin

[2]

Riesser, op. cit.; Diouritch, op. cit., p. 239; Kurt Heinig,
      op. cit.
&#8212;Lenin

[3]

Jeidels, op. cit., S. 192-93.
&#8212;Lenin

[4]

Diouritch, op. cit., pp. 245-46.
&#8212;Lenin

[5]

Die
      Bank, 1912, 1, S. 1036; 1912, 2, S. 629; 1913, 1, S. 388.
&#8212;Lenin

[6]

Riesser, op. cit., S. 125.
&#8212;Lenin

[7]

Vogelstein, Organisationsformen, S. 100.
&#8212;Lenin

[8]

Liefmann, Kartelle und Trusts, 2. A., S. 161.
&#8212;Lenin

     

    

     

            
          

IV. EXPORT OF CAPITAL

          |

          

VI. DIVISION OF THE WORLD AMONG THE GREAT POWERS

            

           

    

    
      
	

	  

	    
	      <
		  backward

	       &#160; &#160; 
	      Contents
	       &#160; &#160; 

	      forward >
	    

	  
	  

	    
	      Works
		  Index   |  

	      Volume 22
	    

	     | 

	    
	      Collected Works

	        |   L.I.A. Index
	    
	  
	
      
    

    &#160;


## ch06

Lenin: 1916/imp-hsc: VI. DIVISION OF THE WORLD AMONG THE GREAT POWERS

    
    
    
    

    
    
  

  
    Vladimir Ilyich Lenin

    Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism

    A POPULAR OUTLINE

    

    VI. DIVISION OF THE WORLD AMONG THE GREAT POWERS

    In his book, on "the territorial development of the European colonies," A. Supan, [1] the geographer, gives the following brief summary of this development at the end of the nineteenth century:

    
      
        
          PERCENTAGE OF TERRITORY BELONGING TO THE EUROPEAN
COLONIAL POWERS
(Including the United States)
        
        
          
          1876
          1900
          Increase or 
decrease
        
        
          Africa..........
          10.8
          90.4
          +79.6
        
        
          Polynesia....
          56.8
          98.9
          +42.1
        
        
          Asia............
          51.5
          56.6
          +5.1
        
        
          Australia.....
          100.0
          100.0
          —
        
        
          America......
          27.5
          27.2
          -0.3
        
      
    

    "The characteristic feature of this period," he concludes, "is, therefore, the division of Africa and Polynesia." As there are no unoccupied territories—that is, territories that do not belong to any state in Asia and America, it is necessary to amplify Supan's conclusion and say that the characteristic feature of the period under review is the final partitioning of the globe—final, not in the sense that repartition is impossible; on the contrary, repartitions are possible and inevitable—but in the sense that the colonial policy of the capitalist countries has completed the seizure of the unoccupied territories on our planet. For the first time the world is completely divided up, so that in the future only redivision is possible, i.e., territories can only pass from one "owner" to another, instead of passing as ownerless territory to an owner

    Hence, we are living in a peculiar epoch of world colonial policy, which is most closely connected with the "latest stage in the development of capitalism," with finance capital. For this reason, it is essential first of all to deal in greater detail with the facts, in order to ascertain as exactly as possible what distinguishes this epoch from those preceding it, and what the present situation is. In the first place, two questions of fact arise here: is an intensification of colonial policy, a sharpening of the struggle for colonies, observed precisely in the epoch of finance capital? And how, in this respect, is the world divided at the present time?

    The American writer, Morris, in his book on the history of colonisation,[2] made an attempt to sum up the data on the colonial possessions of Great Britain, France and Germany during different periods of the nineteenth century. The following is a brief summary of the results he has obtained:

    
      
        
          COLONIAL POSSESSIONS
        
        
          Year
          Great Britain
          France
          Germany
        
        
          Area
(000,000
sq. m.)
          Pop. (000,000)
          Area
(000,000
sq. m.)
          Pop. (000,000)
          Area
(000,000
sq. m.)
          Pop. (000,000)
        
        
          1815-30
          ?
          126.4
          0.02
          0.5
          —
          —
        
        
          1860
          2.5
          145.1
          0.2
          3.4
          —
          —
        
        
          1880
          7.7
          267.9
          0.7
          7.5
          —
          —
        
        
          1899
          9.3
          309.0
          3.7
          56.4
          1.0
          14.7
        
      
    

    For Great Britain, the period of the enormous expansion of colonial conquests was that between 1860 and 1880, and it was also very considerable in the last twenty years of the nineteenth century. For France and Germany this period falls precisely in these twenty years. We saw above that the development of premonopoly capitalism, of capitalism in which free competition was predominant, reached its limit in the 1860s and 1870s. We now see that it is precisely after that period that the tremendous "boom" in colonial conquests begins, and that the struggle for the territorial division of the world becomes extraordinarily sharp. It is beyond doubt, therefore, that capitalism's transition to the stage of monopoly capitalism, to finance capital, is connected with the intensification of the struggle for the partitioning of the world.

    Hobson, in his work on imperialism, marks the years 1884-1900 as the epoch of intensified "expansion" of the chief European states. According to his estimate, Great Britain during these years acquired 3,700,000 square miles of territory with 57,000,000 inhabitants; France, 3,600,000 square miles with 36,500,000; Germany, 1,000,000 square miles with 14,700,000; Belgium, 900,000 square miles with 30,000,000; Portugal, 800,000 square miles with 9,000,000 inhabitants. The scramble for colonies by all the capitalist states at the end of the nineteenth century and particularly since the 1880s is a commonly known fact in the history of diplomacy and of foreign policy.

    In the most flourishing period of free competition in Great Britain, i.e., between 1840 and 1860, the leading British bourgeois politicians were opposed to colonial policy and were of the opinion that the liberation of the colonies, their complete separation from Britain, was inevitable and desirable. M. Beer, in an article, "Modern British Imperialism," [3] published in 1898, shows that in 1852, Disraeli, a statesman who was generally inclined towards imperialism, declared: "The colonies are millstones round our necks." But at the end of the nineteenth century the British heroes of the hour were Cecil Rhodes and Joseph Chamberlain, who openly advocated imperialism and applied the imperialist policy in the most cynical manner!

    It is not without interest to observe that even then these leading British bourgeois politicians saw the connection between what might be called the purely economic and the socio-political roots of modern imperialism. Chamberlain advocated imperialism as a "true, wise and economical policy," and pointed particularly to the German, American and Belgian competition which Great Britain was encountering in the world market. Salvation lies in monopoly,said the capitalists as they formed cartels, syndicates and trusts. Salvation lies in monopoly, echoed the political leaders of the bourgeoisie, hastening to appropriate the parts of the world not yet shared out. And Cecil Rhodes, we are informed by his intimate friend, the journalist Stead, expressed his imperialist views to him in 1895 in the following terms: "I was in the East End of London (a working-class quarter) yesterday and attended a meeting of the unemployed. I listened to the wild speeches, which were just a cry for 'bread! bread!' and on my way home I pondered over the scene and I became more than ever convinced of the importance of imperialism.... My cherished idea is a solution for the social problem, i.e., in order to save the 40,000,000 inhabitants of the United Kingdom from a bloody civil war, we colonial statesmen must acquire new lands to settle the surplus population, to provide new markets for the goods produced in the factories and mines. The Empire, as I have always said, is a bread and butter question. If you want to avoid civil war, you must become imperialists.[4]

    That was said in 1895 by Cecil Rhodes, millionaire, a king of finance, the man who was mainly responsible for the Anglo-Boer War. True, his defence of imperialism is crude and cynical, but in substance it does not differ from the "theory" advocated by Messrs. Maslov, Südekum, Potresov, David, the founder of Russian Marxism and others. Cecil Rhodes was a somewhat more honest social-chauvinist....

    To present as precise a picture as possible of the territorial division of the world and of the changes which have occurred during the last decades in this respect, I shall utilise the data furnished by Supan in the work already quoted on the colonial possessions of all the powers of the world. Supan takes the years 1876 and 1900; I shall take the year 1876—a year very aptly selected, for it is precisely by that time that the pre-monopolist stage of development of West-European capitalism can be said to have been, in the main, completed—and the year 1914, and instead of Supan's figures I shall quote the more recent statistics of Hübner's Geographical and Statistical Tables. Supan gives figures only for colonies; I think it useful, in order to present a complete picture of the division of the world, to add brief data on non-colonial and semi-colonial countries, in which category I place Persia, China and Turkey: the first of these countries is already almost completely a colony, the second and third are becoming such.

    We thus get the following result:

    
      
        
          COLONIAL POSSESSIONS OF THE GREAT POWERS
(000,000 square kilometers and 000,000 inhabitants)
        
        
          
          Colonies
          Metropolitan
countries
          Total
        
        
          1876
          1914
          1914
          1914
        
        
          Area
          Pop.
          Area
          Pop.
          Area
          Pop.
          Area
          Pop.
        
        
          Great 
Britain
          22.5
          251.9
          33.5
          393.5
          0.3
          46.5
          33.8
          444.0
        
        
          Russia
          17.0
          15.9
          17.4
          33.2
          5.4
          136.2
          22.8
          169.4
        
        
          France
          0.9
          6.0
          10.6
          55.5
          0.5
          39.6
          11.1
          95.1
        
        
          Germany
          —
          —
          2.9
          12.3
          0.5
          64.9
          3.4
          77.2
        
        
          
            United

            States
          
          —
          —
          0.3
          9.7
          9.4
          97.0
          9.7
          106.7
        
        
          Japan
          —
          —
          0.3
          19.2
          0.4
          53.0
          0.7
          72.2
        
        
          
            Total for 6 Great
Powers
          
          40.4
          273.8
          65.0
          523.4
          16.5
          437.2
          81.5
          960.6
        
      
    

    
      
        
          Colonies of other powers 
(Belgium, Holland,etc.)

          9.9
          45.3
        
        
          
            Semi-colonial countries

            (Persia, China, Turkey)
          
          14.5
          361.2
        
        
          Other countries
          28.0
          289.9
        
        
          Total for the world
          133.9
          1,657.0
        
      
    

    We clearly see from these figures how "complete" was the partition of the world at the turn of the twentieth century. After 1876 colonial possessions increased to enormous dimensions, by more than fifty per cent, from 40,000,000 to 65,000,000 square kilometres for the six biggest powers; the increase amounts to 25,000,000 square kilometres, fifty per cent more than the area of the metropolitan countries (16,500,000 square kilometres). In 1876 three powers had no colonies, and a fourth, France, had scarcely any. By 1914 these four powers had acquired colonies with an area of 14,100,000 square kilometres, i.e., about half as much again as the area of Europe, with a population of nearly 100,000,000. The unevenness in the rate of expansion of colonial possessions is very great. If, for instance, we compare France, Germany and Japan, which do not differ very much in area and population, we see that the first has acquired almost three times as much colonial territory as the other two combined. In regard to finance capital, France, at the beginning of the period we are considering, was also, perhaps, several times richer than Germany and Japan put together. In addition to, and on the basis of, purely economic conditions, geographical and other conditions also affect the dimensions of colonial possessions. However strong the process of levelling the world, of levelling the economic and living conditions in different countries, may have been in the past decades as a result of the pressure of large-scale industry, exchange and finance capital, considerable differences still remain; and among the six countries mentioned we see, firstly, young capitalist countries (America, Germany, Japan) whose progress has been extraordinarily rapid; secondly, countries with an old capitalist development (France and Great Britain), whose progress lately has been much slower than that of the previously mentioned countries, and thirdly, a country most backward economically (Russia), where modern capitalist imperialism is enmeshed, so to speak, in a particularly close network of pre-capitalist relations.

    Alongside the colonial possessions of the Great Powers, we have placed the small colonies of the small states, which are, so to speak, the next objects of a possible and probable "redivision" of colonies. These small states mostly retain their colonies only because the big powers are torn by conflicting interests, friction, etc., which prevent them from coming to an agreement on the division of the spoils. As to the "semi-colonial" states, they provide an example of the transitional forms which are to be found in all spheres of nature and society. Finance capital is such a great, such a decisive, you might say, force in all economic and in all international relations, that it is capable of subjecting, and actually does subject, to itself even states enjoying the fullest political independence; we shall shortly see examples of this. Of course, finance capital finds most "convenient," and derives the greatest profit from, a form of subjection which involves the loss of the political independence of the subjected countries and peoples. In this respect, the semi-colonial countries provide a typical example of the "middle stage." It is natural that the struggle for these semidependent countries should have become particularly bitter in the epoch of finance capital, when the rest of the world has already been divided up.

    Colonial policy and imperialism existed before the latest stage of capitalism, and even before capitalism. Rome, founded on slavery, pursued a colonial policy and practised imperialism. But "general" disquisitions on imperialism, which ignore, or put into the background, the fundamental difference between socio-economic formations, inevitably turn into the most vapid banality or bragging, like the comparison: "Greater Rome and Greater Britain." [5] Even the capitalist colonial policy of previous stages of capitalism is essentially different from the colonial policy of finance capital.

    The principal feature of the latest stage of capitalism is the domination of monopolist associations of big employers. These monopolies are most firmly established when all the sources of raw materials are captured by one group, and we have seen with what zeal the international capitalist associations exert every effort to deprive their rivals of all opportunity of competing, to buy up, for example, ironfields, oilfields, etc. Colonial possession alone gives the monopolies complete guarantee against all contingencies in the struggle against competitors, including the case of the adversary wanting to be protected by a law establishing a state monopoly. The more capitalism is developed, the more strongly the shortage of raw materials is felt, the more intense the competition and the hunt for sources of raw materials throughout the whole world, the more desperate the struggle for the acquisition of colonies.

    "It may be asserted," writes Schilder, "although it may sound paradoxical to some, that in the more or less foreseeable future the growth of the urban and industrial population is more likely to be hindered by a shortage of raw materials for industry than by a shortage of food." For example, there is a growing shortage of timber—the price of which is steadily rising—of leather, and of raw materials for the textile industry. "Associations of manufacturers are making efforts to create an equilibrium between agriculture and industry in the whole of world economy; as an example of this we might mention the International Federation of Cotton Spinners' Associations in several of the most important industrial countries, founded in 1904, and the European Federation of Flax Spinners' Associations, founded on the same model in 1910." [6]

    Of course, the bourgeois reformists, and among them particularly the present-day adherents of Kautsky, try to belittle the importance of facts of this kind by arguing that raw materials "could be" obtained in the open market without a "costly and dangerous" colonial policy; and that the supply of raw materials "could be" increased enormously by "simply" improving conditions in agriculture in general. But such arguments become an apology for imperialism, an attempt to paint it in bright colours, because they ignore the principal feature of the latest stage of capitalism: monopolies. The free market is becoming more and more a thing of the past; monopolist syndicates and trusts are restricting it with every passing day, and "simply" improving conditions in agriculture means improving the conditions of the masses, raising wages and reducing profits. Where, except in the imagination of sentimental reformists, are there any trusts capable of concerning themselves with the condition of the masses instead of the conquest of colonies?

    Finance capital is interested not only in the already discovered sources of raw materials but also in potential sources, because present-day technical development is extremely rapid, and land which is useless today may be improved tomorrow if new methods are devised (to this end a big bank can equip a special expedition of engineers, agricultural experts, etc.), and if large amounts of capital are invested. This also applies to prospecting for minerals, to new methods of processing up and utilising raw materials, etc., etc. Hence, the inevitable striving of finance capital to enlarge its spheres of influence and even its actual territory. In the same way that the trusts capitalise their property at two or three times its value, taking into account its "potential" (and not actual) profits and the further results of monopoly, so finance capital in general strives to seize the largest possible amount of land of all kinds in all places, and by every means, taking into account potential sources of raw materials and fearing to be left behind in the fierce struggle for the last remnants of independent territory, or for the repartition of those territories that have been already divided.

    The British capitalists are exerting every effort to develop cotton growing in their colony, Egypt (in 1904, out of 2,300,000 hectares of land under cultivation, 600,000, or more than one-fourth, were under cotton); the Russians are doing the same in their colony, Turkestan, because in this way they will be in a better position to defeat their foreign competitors, to monopolise the sources of raw materials and form a more economical and profitable textile trust in which all the processes of cotton production and manufacturing will be "combined" and concentrated in the hands of one set of owners.

    The interests pursued in exporting capital also give an impetus to the conquest of colonies, for in the colonial market it is easier to employ monopoly methods (and sometimes they are the only methods that can be employed) to eliminate competition, to ensure supplies, to secure the necessary "connections," etc.

    The non-economic superstructure which grows up on the basis of finance capital, its politics and its ideology, stimulates the striving for colonial conquest. "Finance capital does not want liberty, it wants domination," as Hilferding very truly says. And a French bourgeois writer, developing and supplementing, as it were, the ideas of Cecil Rhodes quoted above,[7] writes that social causes should be added to the economic causes of modern colonial policy: "Owing to the growing complexities of life and the difficulties which weigh not only on the masses of the workers, but also on the middle classes, 'impatience, irritation and hatred are accumulating in all the countries of the old civilisation and are becoming a menace to public order; the energy which is being hurled out of the definite class channel must be given employment abroad in order to avert an explosion at home'." [8]

    Since we are speaking of colonial policy in the epoch of capitalist imperialism, it must be observed that finance capital and its foreign policy, which is the struggle of the great powers for the economic and political division of the world, give rise to a number of transitional forms of state dependence. Not only are the two main groups of countries, those owning colonies, and the colonies themselves, but also the diverse forms of dependent countries which, politically, are formally independent, but in fact, are enmeshed in the net of financial and diplomatic dependence, typical of this epoch. We have already referred to one form of dependence—the semi-colony. An example of another is provided by Argentina.

    "South America, and especially Argentina," writes Schulze-Gaevernitz in his work on British imperialism, "is so dependent financially on London that it ought to be described as almost a British commercial colony." [9] Basing himself on the reports of the Austro-Hungarian Consul at Buenos Aires for 1909, Schilder estimated the amount of British capital invested in Argentina at 8,750 million francs. It is not difficult to imagine what strong connections British finance capital (and its faithful "friend", diplomacy) thereby acquires with the Argentine bourgeoisie, with the circles that control the whole of that country's economic and political life.

    A somewhat different form of financial and diplomatic dependence, accompanied by political independence, is presented by Portugal. Portugal is an independent sovereign state, but actually, for more than two hundred years, since the war of the Spanish Succession (1701-14), it has been a British protectorate. Great Britain has protected Portugal and her colonies in order to fortify her own positions in the fight against her rivals, Spain and France. In return Great Britain has received commercial privileges, preferential conditions for importing goods and especially capital into Portugal and the Portuguese colonies, the right to use the ports and islands of Portugal, her telegraph cables, etc., etc. [10] Relations of this kind have always existed between big and little states, but in the epoch of capitalist imperialism they become a general system, they form part of the sum total of "divide the world" relations and become links in the chain of operations of world finance capital.

    In order to finish with the question of the division of the world, I must make the following additional observation. This question was raised quite openly and definitely not only in American literature after the Spanish-American War, and in English literature after the Anglo-Boer War, at the very end of the nineteenth century and the beginning of the twentieth; not only has German literature, which has "most jealously" watched "British imperialism," systematically given its appraisal of this fact. This question has also been raised in French bourgeois literature as definitely and broadly as is thinkable from the bourgeois point of view. Let me quote Driault, the historian, who, in his book, Political and Social Problems at the End of the Nineteenth Century, in the chapter "The Great Powers and the Division of the World," wrote the following: "During the past few years, all the free territory of the globe, with the exception of China, has been occupied by the powers of Europe and North America. This has already brought about several conflicts and shifts of spheres of influence, and these foreshadow more terrible upheavals in the near future. For it is necessary to make haste. The nations which have not yet made provision for themselves run the risk of never receiving their share and never participating in the tremendous exploitation of the globe which will be one of the most essential features of the next century (i.e., the twentieth). That is why all Europe and America have lately been afflicted with the fever of colonial expansion, of 'imperialism', that most noteworthy feature of the end of the nineteenth century." And the author added: "Inthis partition of the world, in this furious hunt for the treasures and the big markets of the globe, the relative strength of the empires founded in this nineteenth century is totally out of proportion to the place occupied in Europe by the nations which founded them. The dominant powers in Europe, the arbiters of her destiny, are not equally preponderant in the whole world. And, as colonial might, the hope of controlling as yet unassessed wealth, will evidently react upon the relative strength of the European powers, the colonial question—"imperialism," if you will—which has already modified the political conditions of Europe itself, will modify them more and more." [11]

    

    

    Notes

    

    [1] A. Supan, Die territoriale Entwicklung der europäischen Kolonien, 1906, S. 254.—Lenin

    [2] Henry C. Morris, The History of Colonisation, New York, 1900, Vol. II, p. 88; Vol. 1, p. 419; Vol. 11, p. 304.—Lenin

    [3] Die Neue Zeit, XVI, 1, 1898, S. 302. —Lenin

    [4] Ibid., S. 304.—Lenin

    [5] C. P. Lucas, Greater Rome and Greater Britain, Oxford, 1912, or the Earl of Cromer's Ancient and Modern Imperialism, London, 1910.—Lenin

    [6] Schilder, op. cit., S. 38-42.—Lenin

    [7] See pp. 256–57 of this volume.—Ed.

    [8] Wahl, La France aux colonies quoted by Henri Russier, Le Partage de l'Océanie, Paris, 1905, p. 165.—Lenin

    [9] Schulze-Gaevernitz, Britischer Imperialismus und englischer Freihandel zu Beginn des 20-ten Jahrhunderts, Leipzig, 1906, S. 318. Sartorius v. Waltershausen says the same in Das volkswirtschaftliche System der Kapitalanlage im Auslande, Berlin, 1907, S. 46.—Lenin

    [10] Schilder, op. cit., Vol. I, S. 160-61.—Lenin

    [11] J. E. Driault, Problèmes politiques et sociaux, Paris, 1900, p. 299.—Lenin

    
      
        V. Division of the World Among Capitalist Associations
        |
        VII. Imperialism as a Special Stage of Capitalism
      

      
        Document Index
      
    
    

    
      
        < Backwards
        
        Forwards >
      

      
        Works Index
        |
        Volume 22
        |
        Collected Works
        |
        L.I.A. Index


## ch07

Lenin: 1916/imp-hsc: VII. IMPERIALISM AS A SPECIAL STAGE OF CAPITALISM

    
	
    
    

    
    
  

  

    Vladimir Ilyich Lenin

    Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism

    A POPULAR OUTLINE

    

    

   

  VII. IMPERIALISM AS A SPECIAL STAGE OF CAPITALISM

We must now try to sum up, to draw together the threads of what
      has been said above on the subject of imperialism. Imperialism
      emerged as the development and direct continuation of the
      fundamental characteristics of capitalism in general. But
      capitalism only became capitalist imperialism at a definite and
      very high stage of its development, when certain of its
      fundamental characteristics began to change into their
      opposites, when the features of the epoch of transition from
      capitalism to a higher social and economic system had taken
      shape and revealed themselves in all spheres. Economically, the
      main thing in this process is the displacement of capitalist
      free competition by capitalist monopoly. Free competition is the
      basic feature of capitalism, and of commodity production
      generally; monopoly is the exact opposite of free competition,
      but we have seen the latter being transformed into monopoly
      before our eyes, creating large-scale industry and forcing out
      small industry, replacing large-scale by still larger-scale
      industry, and carrying concentration of production and capital
      to the point where out of it has grown and is growing monopoly:
      cartels, syndicates and trusts, and merging with them, the
      capital

   

of a dozen or so banks, which manipulate thousands of
      millions. At the same time the monopolies, which have grown out
      of free competition, do not eliminate the latter, but exist
      above it and alongside it, and thereby give rise to a number of
      very acute, intense antagonisms, frictions and
      conflicts. Monopoly is the transition from capitalism to a
      higher system.

If it were necessary to give the briefest possible definition of
      imperialism we should have to say that imperialism is the
      monopoly stage of capitalism. Such a definition would include
      what is most important, for, on the one hand, finance capital is
      the bank capital of a few very big monopolist banks, merged with
      the capital of the monopolist associations of industrialists;
      and, on the other hand, the division of the world is the
      transition from a colonial policy which has extended without
      hindrance to territories unseized by any capitalist power, to a
      colonial policy of monopolist possession of the territory of the
      world, which has been completely divided up.

But very brief definitions, although convenient, for they sum up
      the main points, are nevertheless inadequate, since we have to
      deduce from them some especially important features of the
      phenomenon that has to be defined. And so, without forgetting
      the conditional and relative value of all definitions in
      general, which can never embrace all the concatenations of a
      phenomenon in its full development, we must give a definition of
      imperialism that will include the following five of its basic
      features:

(1) the concentration of production and capital has developed to
          such a high stage that it has created monopolies which play
          a decisive role in economic life;
(2) the merging of bank
          capital with industrial capital, and the creation, on the
          basis of this &#8220;finance capital,&#8221; of a financial oligarchy;
(3) the export of capital as distinguished from the export
          of commodities acquires exceptional importance;
(4) the
          formation of international monopolist capitalist
          associations which share the world among themselves and
(5)
          the territorial division of the whole world among the
          biggest capitalist powers is completed. Imperialism is
          capitalism at that stage of development at which the
          dominance of monopolies and finance capital is established;
          in

   

which the export of capital has acquired pronounced
          importance; in which the division of the world among the
          international trusts has begun, in which the division of all
          territories of the globe among the biggest capitalist powers
          has been completed.

We shall see later that imperialism can and must be defined
      differently if we bear in mind not only the basic, purely
      economic concepts&#8212;to which the above definition is
      limited&#8212;but also the historical place of this stage of
      capitalism in relation to capitalism in general, or the relation
      between imperialism and the two main trends in the working-class
      movement. The thing to be noted at this point is that
      imperialism, as interpreted above, undoubtedly represents a
      special stage in the development of capitalism. To enable the
      reader to obtain the most well-grounded idea of imperialism, I
      deliberately tried to quote as extensively as possible
      bourgeois economists who have to admit the particularly
      incontrovertible facts concerning the latest stage of capitalist
      economy. With the same object in view, I have quoted detailed
      statistics which enable one to see to what degree bank capital,
      etc., has grown, in what precisely the transformation of
      quantity into quality, of developed capitalism into imperialism,
      was expressed. Needless to say, of course, all boundaries in
      nature and in society are conventional and changeable, and it
      would be absurd to argue, for example, about the particular year
      or decade in which imperialism &#8220;definitely&#8221; became established.

In the matter of defining imperialism, however, we have to enter
      into controversy, primarily, with Karl Kautsky, the principal
      Marxist theoretician of the epoch of the so-called Second
      International&#8212;that is, of the twenty-five years between
      1889 and 1914. The fundamental ideas expressed in our definition
      of imperialism were very resolutely attacked by Kautsky in 1915,
      and even in November 1914, when he said that imperialism must
      not be regarded as a &#8220;phase&#8221; or stage of economy, but as a
      policy, a definite policy &#8220;preferred&#8221; by finance capital; that
      imperialism must not be &#8220;identified&#8221; with &#8220;present-day
      capitalism&#8221;; that if imperialism is to be understood to mean
      &#8220;all the phenomena of present-day capitalism&#8221;&#8212;cartels,
      protection, the domination of the financiers, and colonial
      policy&#8212;then the

   

question as to whether imperialism is
      necessary to capitalism becomes reduced to the &#8220;flattest
      tautology&#8221;, because, in that case, &#8220;imperialism is naturally a
      vital necessity for capitalism&#8221;, and so on. The best way to
      present Kautsky&#8217;s idea is to quote his own definition of
      imperialism, which is diametrically opposed to the substance of
      the ideas which I have set forth (for the objections coming from
      the camp of the German Marxists, who have been advocating
      similar ideas for many years already, have been long known to
      Kautsky as the objections of a definite trend in Marxism).

Kautsky&#8217;s definition is as follows:

&#8220;Imperialism is a product of highly developed industrial
      capitalism. It consists in the striving of every industrial
      capitalist nation to bring under its control or to annex all
      large areas of agrarian [Kautsky&#8217;s italics] territory,
      irrespective of what nations inhabit
it.&#8221; [1]

This definition is of no use at all because it one-sidedly,
      i.e., arbitrarily, singles out only the national question
      (although the latter is extremely important in itself as well as
      in its relation to imperialism), it arbitrarily and
      inaccurately connects this question only with
      industrial capital in the countries which annex other nations,
      and in an equally arbitrary and inaccurate manner pushes into
      the forefront the annexation of agrarian regions.

Imperialism is a striving for annexations&#8212;this is what
      the political part of Kautsky&#8217;s definition amounts
      to. It is correct, but very incomplete, for politically,
      imperialism is, in general, a striving towards violence and
      reaction. For the moment, however, we are interested in the
      economic aspect of the question, which Kautsky
      himself introduced into his definition. The
      inaccuracies in Kautsky&#8217;s definition are glaring. The
      characteristic feature of imperialism is not industrial but
      finance capital. It is not an accident that in France it
      was precisely the extraordinarily rapid development of
      finance capital, and the weakening of industrial
      capital, that from the eighties onwards gave rise to the extreme
      intensification of annexationist (colonial) policy. The
      characteristic feature of imperialism is precisely

   

that it
      strives to annex not only agrarian territories, but
      even most highly industrialised regions (German appetite for
      Belgium; French appetite for Lorraine), because (1) the fact
      that the world is already partitioned obliges those
      contemplating a redivision to reach out for every
      kind of territory, and (2) an essential feature of
      imperialism is the rivalry between several great powers in the
      striving for hegemony, i.e., for the conquest of territory, not
      so much directly for themselves as to weaken the adversary and
      undermine his hegemony. (Belgium is particularly
      important for Germany as a base for operations against Britain;
      Britain needs Baghdad as a base for operations against Germany,
      etc.)

Kautsky refers especially&#8212;and repeatedly&#8212;to
      English writers who, he alleges, have given a purely political
      meaning to the word &#8220;imperialism&#8221; in the sense that he, Kautsky,
      understands it. We take up the work by the English writer
      Hobson, Imperialism, which appeared in 1902, and there
      we read:

&#8220;The new imperialism differs from the older, first, in
      substituting for the ambition of a single growing empire the
      theory and the practice of competing empires, each motivated by
      similar lusts of political aggrandisement and commercial gain;
      secondly, in the dominance of financial or investing over
      mercantile
interests.&#8221; [2]

We see that Kautsky is absolutely wrong in referring to English
      writers generally (unless he meant the vulgar English
      imperialists, or the avowed apologists for imperialism). We see
      that Kautsky, while claiming that he continues to advocate
      Marxism, as a matter of fact takes a step backward compared with
      the social-liberal Hobson, who more correctly
      takes into account two &#8220;historically concrete&#8221; (Kautsky&#8217;s
      definition is a mockery of historical concreteness!) features of
      modern imperialism: (1) the competition between several
      imperialisms, and (2) the predominance of the financier
      over the merchant. If it is chiefly a question of the annexation
      of agrarian countries by industrial countries, then the role of
      the merchant is put in the forefront.

  

Kautsky&#8217;s definition is not only wrong and un-Marxist. It serves
      as a basis for a whole system of views which signify a rupture
      with Marxist theory and Marxist practice all along the line. I
      shall refer to this later. The argument about words which
      Kautsky raises as to whether the latest stage of capitalism
      should be called imperialism or the stage of finance capital is
      not worth serious attention. Call it what you will, it makes no
      difference. The essence of the matter is that Kautsky detaches
      the politics of imperialism from its economics, speaks of
      annexations as being a policy &#8220;preferred&#8221; by finance capital,
      and opposes to it another bourgeois policy which, he alleges, is
      possible on this very same basis of finance capital. It follows,
      then, that monopolies in the economy are compatible with
      non-monopolistic, non-violent, non-annexationist methods in
      politics. It follows, then, that the territorial division of the
      world, which was completed during this very epoch of finance
      capital, and which constitutes the basis of the present peculiar
      forms of rivalry between the biggest capitalist states, is
      compatible with a non-imperialist policy. The result is a
      slurring-over and a blunting of the most profound contradictions
      of the latest stage of capitalism, instead of an exposure of
      their depth; the result is bourgeois reformism instead of
      Marxism.

Kautsky enters into controversy with the German apologist of
      imperialism and annexations, Cunow, who clumsily and cynically
      argues that imperialism is present-day capitalism; the
      development of capitalism is inevitable and progressive;
      therefore imperialism is progressive; therefore, we should
      grovel before it and glorify it! This is something like the
      caricature of the Russian Marxists which the Narodniks drew in
      1894-95. They argued: if the Marxists believe that capitalism is
      inevitable in Russia, that it is progressive, then they ought to
      open a tavern and begin to implant capitalism! Kautsky&#8217;s reply
      to Cunow is as follows: imperialism is not present-day
      capitalism; it is only one of the forms of the policy of
      present-day capitalism. This policy we can and should fight,
      fight imperialism, annexations, etc.

The reply seems quite plausible, but in effect it is a more
      subtle and more disguised (and therefore more dangerous)
      advocacy of conciliation with imperialism, because a

   

&#8220;fight&#8221;
      against the policy of the trusts and banks that does not affect
      the economic basis of the trusts and banks is mere bourgeois
      reformism and pacifism, the benevolent and innocent expression
      of pious wishes. Evasion of existing contradictions, forgetting
      the most important of them, instead of revealing their full
      depth&#8212;such is Kautsky&#8217;s theory, which has nothing in
      common with Marxism. Naturally, such a &#8220;theory&#8221; can only serve
      the purpose of advocating unity with the Cunows!

&#8220;From the purely economic point of view,&#8221; writes Kautsky, &#8220;it is
      not impossible that capitalism will yet go through a new phase,
      that of the extension of the policy of the cartels to foreign
      policy, the phase of
ultra-imperialism,&#8221; [3]

i.e., of a
      superimperialism, of a union of the imperialisms of the whole
      world and not struggles among them, a phase when wars shall
      cease under capitalism, a phase of &#8220;the joint exploitation of
      the world by internationally united finance
capital.&#8221; [4]

We shall have to deal with this &#8220;theory of ultra-imperialism&#8221;
      later on in order to show in detail how decisively and
      completely it breaks with Marxism. At present, in keeping with
      the general plan of the present work, we must examine the exact
      economic data on this question. &#8220;From the purely economic point
      of view,&#8221; is &#8220;ultra-imperialism&#8221; possible, or is it
      ultra-nonsense?

If the purely economic point of view is meant to be a &#8220;pure&#8221;
      abstraction, then all that can be said reduces itself to the
      following proposition: development is proceeding towards
      monopolies, hence, towards a single world monopoly, towards a
      single world trust. This is indisputable, but it is also as
      completely meaningless as is the statement that &#8220;development is
      proceeding&#8221; towards the manufacture of foodstuffs in
      laboratories. In this sense the &#8220;theory&#8221; of ultra-imperialism is
      no less absurd than a &#8220;theory of ultra-agriculture&#8221; would be.

If, however, we are discussing the &#8220;purely economic&#8221; conditions
      of the epoch of finance capital as a historically concrete epoch
      which began at the turn of the twentieth

   

century, then the best
      reply that one can make to the lifeless abstractions of
      &#8220;ultra-imperialism&#8221; (which serve exclusively a most reactionary
      aim: that of diverting attention from the depth of existing
      antagonisms) is to contrast them with the concrete economic
      realities of the present-day world economy. Kautsky&#8217;s utterly
      meaningless talk about ultra-imperialism encourages, among other
      things, that profoundly mistaken idea which only brings grist to
      the mill of the apologists of imperialism, i.e., that the rule
      of finance capital lessens the unevenness and
      contradictions inherent in the world economy, whereas in reality
      it increases them.

R. Calwer, in his little book, An Introduction to the World
      Economy, [5]

made an attempt to summarise the
      main, purely economic, data that enable one to obtain a concrete
      picture of the internal relations of the world economy at the
      turn of the twentieth century. He divides the world into five
      &#8220;main economic areas&#8221;, as follows: (1) Central Europe (the whole
      of Europe with the exception of Russia and Great Britain); (2)
      Great Britain; (3) Russia; (4) Eastern Asia; (5) America; he
      includes the colonies in the &#8220;areas&#8221; of the states to which they
      belong and &#8220;leaves aside&#8221; a few countries not distributed
      according to areas, such as Persia, Afghanistan, and Arabia in
      Asia, Morocco and Abyssinia in Africa, etc.

Here is a brief summary of the economic data he quotes on these regions.

    
      
	  
	    Principal
economic
areas

	    Area
	    Pop.
	    Transport
	    Trade
	    Industry
	  
	  
	    Million sq.
miles
	    Millions
	    Railways
(thou. km)
	    Mercantile
fleet (mill-
ions tons)

	    Imports,
exports
(thous-million
marks)

	    Output
	     
	
	  
	    Of coal (mill.
tons)
	    Of pig iron
(mill. tons)
	    Number
of cotton
spindles
(millions)
	  
	  
	    1) Central
Europe
	    27.6

(23.6)

	    388
(146)
	    204
	    8
	    41
	    251
	    15
	    26
	  
	  
	    2) Britain
	    28.9

(28.6)

	    398
(355)
	    140
	    11
	    25
	    249
	    9
	    51
	  
	  
	    3) Russia
	    22
	    131
	    63
	    1
	    3
	    16
	    3
	    7
	  
	  
	    4) Eastern Asia
	    12
	    389
	    8
	    1
	    2
	    8
	    0.02
	    2
	  
	  
	    5) America
	    30
	    148
	    379
	    6
	    14
	    245
	    14
	    19
	  
      

	NOTE: The figures in parentheses show the area and
	population of the colonies.

    

  

We see three areas of highly developed capitalism (high
      development of means of transport, of trade and of industry):
      the Central European, the British and the American areas. Among
      these are three states which dominate the world: Germany, Great
      Britain, and the United States. Imperialist rivalry and the
      struggle between these countries have become extremely keen
      because Germany has only an insignificant area and few colonies;
      the creation of &#8220;Central Europe&#8221; is still a matter for the
      future, it is being born in the midst of a desperate
      struggle. For the moment the distinctive feature of the whole of
      Europe is political disunity. In the British and American areas,
      on the other hand, political concentration is very highly
      developed, but there is a vast disparity between the immense
      colonies of the one and the insignificant colonies of the
      other. In the colonies, however, capitalism is only beginning to
      develop. The struggle for South America is becoming more and
      more acute.

There are two areas where capitalism is little developed: Russia
      and Eastern Asia. In the former, the population is extremely
      sparse, in the latter it is extremely dense; in the former
      political concentration is high, in the latter it does not
      exist. The partitioning of China is only just beginning, and the
      struggle for it between Japan, the U.S., etc., is continually
      gaining in intensity.

Compare this reality&#8212;the vast diversity of economic and
      political conditions, the extreme disparity in the rate of
      development of the various countries, etc., and the violent
      struggles among the imperialist states&#8212;with Kautsky&#8217;s
      silly little fable about &#8220;peaceful&#8221; ultra-imperialism. Is this
      not the reactionary attempt of a frightened philistine to hide
      from stern reality? Are not the international cartels which
      Kautsky imagines are the embryos of &#8220;ultra-imperialism&#8221; (in the
      same way as one &#8220;can&#8221; describe the manufacture of tablets in a
      laboratory as ultra-agriculture in embryo) an example of the
      division and the redivision of the world, the
      transition from peaceful division to non-peaceful division and
      vice versa? Is not American and other finance capital, which
      divided the whole world peacefully with Germany&#8217;s participation
      in, for example, the international rail syndicate, or in the
      international mercantile

   

shipping trust, now engaged in
      redividing the world on the basis of a new relation of
      forces that is being changed by methods anything but
      peaceful?

Finance capital and the trusts do not diminish but increase the
      differences in the rate of growth of the various parts of the
      world economy. Once the relation of forces is changed, what
      other solution of the contradictions can be found under
      capitalism than that of force? Railway
statistics [6]

provide
      remarkably exact data on the different rates of growth of
      capitalism and finance capital in world economy. In the last
      decades of imperialist development, the total length of railways
      has changed as follows:

    
      
	  
	     
	    Railways (000 kilometers)
	  
	  
	    1890
	    1913
	    +
	  
	  
	    Europe
	    224
	     
	    346
	     
	    +122
	     
	  
	  
	    U.S.
	    268
	    411
	    +143
	  
	  
	    All colonies
	    82
	    125
	    210
	    347
	    +128
	    +222
	  
	  
	    Independent and semi-independent 
states of Asia and America
	    43
	    137
	    +94
	  
	  
	    Total
	    617
	     
	    1,104
	     
	     
	     
	  
      
    

Thus, the development of railways has been most rapid in the
      colonies and in the independent (and semi-independent) states of
      Asia and America. Here, as we know, the finance capital of the
      four or five biggest capitalist states holds undisputed
      sway. Two hundred thousand kilometres of new railways in the
      colonies and in the other countries of Asia and America
      represent a capital of more than 40,000 million marks newly
      invested on particularly advantageous terms, with special
      guarantees of a good return and with profitable orders for steel
      works, etc., etc.

Capitalism is growing with the greatest rapidity in the colonies
      and in overseas countries. Among the latter, new imperialist
      powers are emerging (e.g., Japan). The struggle

   

among the world
      imperialisms is becoming more acute. The tribute levied by
      finance capital on the most profitable colonial and overseas
      enterprises is increasing. In the division of this &#8220;booty,&#8221; an
      exceptionally large part goes to countries which do not always
      stand at the top of the list in the rapidity of the development
      of their productive forces. In the case of the biggest
      countries, together with their colonies, the total length of
      railways was as follows:

    
      
	  
	     
	    (000 kilometres)
	  
	  
	    1890
	    1913
	     
	  
	  
	    U.S.
	    268
	    413
	    +145
	  
	  
	    British Empire
	    107
	    208
	    +101
	  
	  
	    Russia
	    32
	    78
	    +46
	  
	  
	    Germany
	    43
	    68
	    +25
	  
	  
	    France
	    41
	    63
	    +22
	  
	  
	    Total
	    491
	    830
	    +339
	  
      
    

Thus, about 80 per cent of the total existing railways are
      concentrated in the hands of the five biggest powers. But the
      concentration of the ownership of these railways, the
      concentration of finance capital, is immeasurably greater since
      the French and British millionaires, for example, own an
      enormous amount of shares and bonds in American, Russian and
      other railways.

Thanks to her colonies, Great Britain has increased the length
      of &#8220;her&#8221; railways by 100,000 kilometres, four times as much as
      Germany. And yet, it is well known that the development of
      productive forces in Germany, and especially the development of
      the coal and iron industries, has been incomparably more rapid
      during this period than in Britain&#8212;not to speak of France
      and Russia. In 1892, Germany produced 4,900,000 tons of pig-iron
      and Great Britain produced 6,800,000 tons; in 1912, Germany
      produced 17,600,000 tons and Great Britain, 9,000,000
      tons. Germany, therefore, had an overwhelming superiority over
      Britain in this
respect. [7]

The question is: what means other

   

than war could there be under capitalism to overcome
      the disparity between the development of productive forces and
      the accumulation of capital on the one side, and the division of
      colonies and spheres of influence for finance capital on the
      other?

     

    

    Notes

     

[1]

Die Neue Zeit, 1914, 2 (B. 32), S. 909, Sept. 11, 1914;
      cf. 1915, 2, S. 107 et seq.
&#8212;Lenin

[2]

Hobson, Imperialism, London, 1902, p. 324.
&#8212;Lenin

[3]

Die
      Neue Zeit, 1914, 2 (B. 32), S. 921, Sept. 11,
      1914. Cf. 1915, 2, S. 107 et seq.
&#8212;Lenin

[4]

      Ibid., 1915, 1, S. 144, April 30, 1915.
&#8212;Lenin

[5]

R. Calwer, Einf&uuml; hrung in die Weltwirtschaft,
      Berlin, 1906.
&#8212;Lenin

[6]

Statistisches Jahrbuch f&uuml;r das deutsche Reich, 1915;
      Archiv f&uuml;r Eisenbahnwesen, 1892. Minor details for the
      distribution of railways among the colonies of the various
      countries in 1890 had to be estimated approximately.
&#8212;Lenin

[7]

Cf. also Edgar Crammond, &#8220;The Economic Relations of the British
      and German Empires&#8221; in The Journal of the Royal Statistical
      Society, July 1914, p. 777 et seq.
&#8212;Lenin

     

    

     

            
          

VI. DIVISION OF THE WORLD AMONG THE GREAT POWERS

          |

          

VIII. PARASITISM AND DECAY OF CAPITALISM

            

           

    

    
      
	

	  

	    
	      <
		  backward

	       &#160; &#160; 
	      Contents
	       &#160; &#160; 

	      forward >
	    

	  
	  

	    
	      Works
		  Index   |  

	      Volume 22
	    

	     | 

	    
	      Collected Works

	        |   L.I.A. Index
	    
	  
	
      
    

    &#160;


## ch08

Lenin: 1916/imp-hsc: VIII. PARASITISM AND DECAY OF CAPITALISM

    
	
    
    

    
    
  

  

    Vladimir Ilyich Lenin

    Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism

    A POPULAR OUTLINE

    

    

    

  

      VIII. PARASITISM AND DECAY OF CAPITALISM

We now have to examine yet another significant aspect of
      imperialism to which most of the discussions on the subject
      usually attach insufficient importance. One of the shortcomings
      of the Marxist Hilferding is that on this point he has taken a
      step backward compared with the non-Marxist Hobson. I refer to
      parasitism, which is characteristic of imperialism.

As we have seen, the deepest economic foundation of imperialism
      is monopoly. This is capitalist monopoly, i.e., monopoly which
      has grown out of capitalism and which exists in the general
      environment of capitalism, commodity production and competition,
      in permanent and insoluble contradiction to this general
      environment. Nevertheless, like all monopoly, it inevitably
      engenders a tendency of stagnation and decay. Since monopoly
      prices are established, even temporarily, the motive cause of
      technical and, consequently, of all other progress disappears to
      a certain extent and, further, the economic possibility arises
      of deliberately retarding technical progress. For instance, in
      America, a certain Owens invented a machine which revolutionised
      the manufacture of bottles. The German bottle-manufacturing
      cartel purchased Owens&#8217;s patent, but pigeon-holed it, refrained
      from utilising it. Certainly, monopoly under capitalism can
      never completely, and for a very long period of time, eliminate
      competition in the world market (and this, by the by, is one of
      the reasons why the theory of ultra-imperialism is so
      absurd). Certainly, the possibility of reducing the cost of
      production and increasing profits by introducing technical
      improvements operates in the direction of change. But the
      tendency to stagnation and decay, which is characteristic of
      monopoly, continues to operate, and in some branches of
      industry, in some countries, for certain periods of time, it
      gains the upper hand.

 

The monopoly ownership of very extensive, rich or well-situated
      colonies operates in the same direction.

Further, imperialism is an immense accumulation of money capital
      in a few countries, amounting, as we have seen, to
      100,000-150,000 million francs in securities. Hence the
      extraordinary growth of a class, or rather, of a stratum of
      rentiers, i.e., people who live by &#8220;clipping coupons,&#8221; who take
      no part in any enterprise whatever, whose profession is
      idleness. The export of capital, one of the most essential
      economic bases of imperialism, still more completely isolates
      the rentiers from production and sets the seal of parasitism on
      the whole country that lives by exploiting the labour of several
      overseas countries and colonies.

&#8220;In 1893,&#8221; writes Hobson, &#8220;the British capital invested abroad
      represented about 15 per cent of the total wealth of the United
      Kingdom.&#8221;[1]

      Let me remind the reader that by 1915 this capital had increased
      about two and a half times. &#8220;Aggressive imperialism,&#8221; says
      Hobson further on, &#8220;which costs the tax-payer so dear, which is
      of so little value to the manufacturer and trader ... is a
      source of great gain to the investor.... The annual income Great
      Britain derives from commissions in her whole foreign and
      colonial trade, import and export, is estimated by Sir R. Giffen
      at &pound;18,000,000 (nearly 170 million rubles) for 1899, taken
      at 2 1/2 per cent, upon a turnover of &pound;800,000,000.&#8221; Great
      as this sum is, it cannot explain the aggressive imperialism of
      Great Britain, which is explained by the income of &pound;90
      million to &pound;100 million from &#8220;invested&#8221; capital, the
      income of the rentiers.

The income of the rentiers is five times greater than
      the income obtained from the foreign trade of the biggest
      &#8220;trading&#8221; country in the world! This is the essence of
      imperialism and imperialist parasitism.

For that reason the term &#8220;rentier state&#8221; (Rentnerstaat), or
      usurer state, is coming into common use in the economic
      literature that deals with imperialism. The world has become
      divided into a handful of usurer states and a vast majority of
      debtor states. &#8220;At the top of the list of foreign investments,&#8221;
      says Schulze-Gaevernitz, &#8220;are those placed

  

in politically
      dependent or allied countries: Great Britain grants loans to
      Egypt, Japan, China and South America. Her navy plays here the
      part of bailiff in case of necessity. Great Britain&#8217;s political
      power protects her from the indignation of her
debtors.&#8221;[2]

Sartorius
      von Waltershausen in his book, The National Economic System
      of Capital Investments Abroad, cites Holland as the model
      &#8220;rentier state&#8221; and points out that Great Britain and France are
      now becoming
such.[3]

Schilder is of the opinion that five
      industrial states have become &#8220;definitely pronounced creditor
      countries&#8221;: Great Britain, France, Germany, Belgium and
      Switzerland. He does not include Holland in this list simply
      because she is &#8220;industrially little
developed.&#8221;[4]

The United States is
      a creditor only of the American countries.

&#8220;Great Britain,&#8221; says Schulze-Gaevernitz, &#8220;is gradually becoming
      transformed from an industrial into a creditor
      state. Notwithstanding the absolute increase in industrial
      output and the export of manufactured goods, there is an
      increase in the relative importance of income from interest and
      dividends, issues of securities, commissions and speculation in
      the whole of the national economy. In my opinion it is precisely
      this that forms the economic basis of imperialist
      ascendancy. The creditor is more firmly attached to the debtor
      than the seller is to the
buyer.[5]

In regard to Germany, A. Lansburgh,
      the publisher of the Berlin Die Bank, in 1911, in an
      article entitled &#8220;Germany&#8212;a Rentier State&#8221;, wrote the
      following: &#8220;People in Germany are ready to sneer at the yearning
      to become rentiers that is observed in France. But they forget
      that as far as the bourgeoisie is concerned the situation in
      Germany is becoming more and more like that in
France.&#8221;[6]

The rentier state is a state of parasitic, decaying capitalism,
      and this circumstance cannot fail to influence all the
      socio-political conditions of the countries concerned, in
      general, and the two fundamental trends in the working-class

  

movement, in particular. To demonstrate this in the clearest
      possible manner let me quote Hobson, who is a most reliable
      witness, since he cannot be suspected of leaning towards Marxist
      orthodoxy; on the other hand, he is an Englishman who is very
      well acquainted with the situation in the country which is
      richest in colonies, in finance capital, and in imperialist
      experience.

With the Anglo-Boer War fresh in his mind, Hobson describes the
      connection between imperialism and the interests of the
      &#8220;financiers,&#8221; their growing profits from contracts, supplies,
      etc., and writes: &#8220;While the directors of this definitely
      parasitic policy are capitalists, the same motives appeal to
      special classes of the workers. In many towns most important
      trades are dependent upon government employment or contracts;
      the imperialism of the metal and shipbuilding centres is
      attributable in no small degree to this fact.&#8221; Two sets of
      circumstances, in this writer&#8217;s opinion, have weakened the old
      empires: (1) &#8220;economic parasitism,&#8221; and (2) the formation of
      armies recruited from subject peoples. &#8220;There is first the habit
      of economic parasitism, by which the ruling state has used its
      provinces, colonies, and dependencies in order to enrich its
      ruling class and to bribe its lower classes into
      acquiescence.&#8221; And I shall add that the economic possibility of
      such bribery, whatever its form may be, requires high monopolist
      profits.

As for the second circumstance, Hobson writes: &#8220;One of the
      strangest symptoms of the blindness of imperialism is the
      reckless indifference with which Great Britain, France and other
      imperial nations are embarking on this perilous
      dependence. Great Britain has gone farthest. Most of the
      fighting by which we have won our Indian Empire has been done by
      natives; in India, as more recently in Egypt, great standing
      armies are placed under British commanders; almost all the
      fighting associated with our African dominions, except in the
      southern part, has been done for us by natives.&#8221;

Hobson gives the following economic appraisal of the prospect of
      the partitioning of China: &#8220;The greater part of Western Europe
      might then assume the appearance and character already exhibited
      by tracts of country in the

  

South of England, in the Riviera and
      in the tourist-ridden or residential parts of Italy and
      Switzerland, little clusters of wealthy aristocrats drawing
      dividends and pensions from the Far East, with a somewhat larger
      group of professional retainers and tradesmen and a larger body
      of personal servants and workers in the transport trade and in
      the final stages of production of the more perishable goods; all
      the main arterial industries would have disappeared, the staple
      foods and manufactures flowing in as tribute from Asia and
      Africa. . . . We have foreshadowed the possibility of even a
      larger alliance of Western states, a European federation of
      great powers which, so far from forwarding the cause of world
      civilisation, might introduce the gigantic peril of a Western
      parasitism, a group of advanced industrial nations, whose upper
      classes drew vast tribute from Asia and Africa, with which they
      supported great tame masses of retainers, no longer engaged in
      the staple industries of agriculture and manufacture, but kept
      in the performance of personal or minor industrial services
      under the control of a new financial aristocracy. Let those who
      would scout such a theory (it would be better to say: prospect)
      as undeserving of consideration examine the economic and social
      condition of districts in Southern England today which are
      already reduced to this condition, and reflect upon the vast
      extension of such a system which might be rendered feasible by
      the subjection of China to the economic control of similar
      groups of financiers, investors, and political and business
      officials, draining the greatest potential reservoir of profit
      the world has ever known, in order to consume it in Europe. The
      situation is far too complex, the play of world forces far too
      incalculable, to render this or any other single interpretation
      of the future very probable; but the influences which govern the
      imperialism of Western Europe today are moving in this
      direction, and, unless counteracted or diverted, make towards
      some such
consummation.&#8221;[7]

The author is quite right: if the forces of imperialism had not
      been counteracted they would have led precisely to what he has
      described. The significance of a &#8220;United States of Europe&#8221; in
      the present imperialist situation is

  

correctly appraised. He
      should have added, however, that, also within the
      working-class movement, the opportunists, who are for the moment
      victorious in most countries, are &#8220;working&#8221; systematically and
      undeviatingly in this very direction. Imperialism, which means
      the partitioning of the world, and the exploitation of other
      countries besides China, which means high monopoly profits for a
      handful of very rich countries, makes it economically possible
      to bribe the upper strata of the proletariat, and thereby
      fosters, gives shape to, and strengthens opportunism. We must
      not, however, lose sight of the forces which counteract
      imperialism in general, and opportunism in particular, and
      which, naturally, the social-liberal Hobson is unable to
      perceive.

The German opportunist, Gerhard Hildebrand, who was once
      expelled from the Party for defending imperialism, and who could
      today be a leader of the so-called &#8220;Social-Democratic&#8221; Party of
      Germany, supplements Hobson well by his advocacy of a &#8220;United
      States of Western Europe&#8221; (without Russia) for the purpose of
      &#8220;joint&#8221; action ... against the African Negroes, against the
      &#8220;great Islamic movement,&#8221; for the maintenance of a &#8220;powerful
      army and navy&#8221;, against a &#8220;Sino-Japanese
coalition,&#8221;[8]

etc.

The description of &#8220;British imperialism&#8221; in Schulze-Gaevernitz&#8217;s
      book reveals the same parasitical traits. The national income of
      Great Britain approximately doubled from 1865 to 1898, while the
      income &#8220;from abroad&#8221; increased nine-fold in the same
      period. While the &#8220;merit&#8221; of imperialism is that it &#8220;trains the
      Negro to habits of industry&#8221; (you cannot manage without coercion
      ... ), the &#8220;danger&#8221; of imperialism lies in that &#8220;Europe will
      shift the burden of physical toil&#8212;first agricultural and
      mining, then the rougher work in industry&#8212;on to the
      coloured races, and itself be content with the role of rentier,
      and in this way, perhaps, pave the way for the economic, and
      later, the political emancipation of the coloured races.&#8221;

An increasing proportion of land in England is being taken out
      of cultivation and used for sport, for the diversion

  

of the
rich. As far as Scotland&#8212;the most aristocratic place for
      hunting and other sports&#8212;is concerned, it is said that
      &#8220;it lives on its past and on Mr. Carnegie&#8221; (the American
      multimillionaire). On horse racing and fox hunting alone England
      annually spends &pound;14,000,000 (nearly 130 million
      rubles). The number of rentiers in England is about one
      million. The percentage of the productively employed population
      to the total population is declining:

    
      
	  
	     
	    Population
England and
	      
Wales (000,000)

	    Workers in 
basic
	      industries
(000,000)

	    Per cent of 
total popula-
tion
	  
	  
	    1851.....
	    17.9
	    4.1
	    23
	  
	  
	    1901.....
	    32.5
	    4.9
	    15
	  
      
    

And in speaking of the British working class the bourgeois
      student of &#8220;British imperialism at the beginning of the
      twentieth century&#8221; is obliged to distinguish systematically
      between the &#8220;upper stratum&#8221; of the workers and the
      &#8220;lower stratum of the proletariat proper.&#8221; The
      upper stratum furnishes the bulk of the membership of
      co-operatives, of trade unions, of sporting clubs and of
      numerous religious sects. To this level is adapted the electoral
      system, which in Great Britain is still &#8220;sufficiently
      restricted to exclude the lower stratum of the proletariat
      proper"! In order to present the condition of the British
      working class in a rosy light, only this upper stratum&#8212;which
      constitutes a minority of the proletariat&#8212;is usually
      spoken of. For instance, &#8220;the problem of unemployment
      is mainly a London problem and that of the lower
      proletarian stratum, to which the politicians attach little
      importance...&#8221;[9]

He should have said: to which
      the bourgeois politicians and the &#8220;socialist&#8221; opportunists
      attach little importance.

One of the special features of imperialism connected with the
      facts I am describing, is the decline in emigration from
      imperialist countries and the increase in immigration into these
      countries from the more backward countries where lower wages are
      paid. As Hobson observes, emigration from Great Britain has been
      declining since 1884. In that year the number of emigrants was
      242,000,

  

while in 1900, the number was 169,000. Emigration from
      Germany reached the highest point between 1881 and 1890, with a
      total of 1,453,000 emigrants. In the course of the following two
      decades, it fell to 544,000 and to 341,000. On the other hand,
      there was an increase in the number of workers entering Germany
      from Austria, Italy, Russia and other countries. According to
      the 1907 census, there were 1,342,294 foreigners in Germany, of
      whom 440,800 were industrial workers and 257,329 agricultural
workers.[10]

In France, the workers employed in
      the mining industry are, &#8220;in great part,&#8221; foreigners: Poles,
      Italians and
Spaniards.[11]

In the United States, immigrants
      from Eastern and Southern Europe are engaged in the most poorly
      paid jobs, while American workers provide the highest percentage
      of overseers or of the better-paid
workers.[12]

Imperialism has
      the tendency to  create privileged sections also among the
      workers, and to detach them from the broad masses of the
      proletariat.

It must be observed that in Great Britain the tendency of
      imperialism to split the workers, to strengthen opportunism
      among them and to cause temporary decay in the working-class
      movement, revealed itself much earlier than the end of the
      nineteenth and the beginning of the twentieth centuries; for two
      important distinguishing features of imperialism were already
      observed in Great Britain in the middle of the nineteenth
      century&#8212;vast colonial possessions and a monopolist
      position in the world market. Marx and Engels traced this
      connection between opportunism in the working-class movement and
      the imperialist features of British capitalism systematically,
      during the course of several decades. For example, on October 7,
      1858, Engels wrote to Marx: &#8220;The English proletariat is actually
      becoming more and more bourgeois, so that this most bourgeois of
      all nations is apparently aiming ultimately at the possession of
      a bourgeois aristocracy and a bourgeois proletariat
      alongside the bourgeoisie. For a nation which exploits
      the whole world this is of course to a certain extent
justifiable.&#8221;[13] Almost a quarter of a century later, in

  

a letter
      dated August 11, 1881, Engels speaks of the &#8220;worst English trade
      unions which allow themselves to be led by men sold to, or at
      least paid by, the middle class&#8221;. In a letter to Kautsky, dated
      September 12, 1882, Engels wrote: &#8220;You ask me what the English
      workers think about colonial policy. Well, exactly the same as
      they think about politics in general. There is no workers&#8217; party
      here, there are only Conservatives and Liberal-Radicals, and the
      workers gaily share the feast of England&#8217;s monopoly of the world
      market and the
colonies.&#8221;[13]

(Engels expressed similar ideas in
      the press in his preface to the second edition of The
      Condition of the Working Class in England, which appeared
      in 1892.)

This clearly shows the causes and effects. The causes are: (1)
      exploitation of the whole world by this country; (2) its
      monopolist position in the world market; (3) its colonial
      monopoly. The effects are: (1) a section of the British
      proletariat becomes bourgeois; (2) a section of the proletariat
      allows itself to be led by men bought by, or at least paid by,
      the bourgeoisie. The imperialism of the beginning of the
      twentieth century completed the division of the world among a
      handful of states, each of which today exploits (in the sense of
      drawing superprofits from) a part of the &#8220;whole world&#8221; only a
      little smaller than that which England exploited in 1858; each
      of them occupies a monopolist position in the world market
      thanks to trusts, cartels, finance capital and creditor and
      debtor relations; each of them enjoys to some degree a colonial
      monopoly (we have seen that out of the total of 75,000,000
      sq. km., which comprise the whole colonial world,
      65,000,000 sq. km., or 86 per cent, belong to six
      powers; 61,000,000 sq. km., or 81 per cent, belong to
      three powers).

The distinctive feature of the present situation is the
      prevalence of such economic and political conditions that are
      bound to increase the irreconcilability between opportunism and
      the general and vital interests of the working-class movement:
      imperialism has grown from an embryo into the predominant
      system; capitalist monopolies occupy

  

first place in economics
      and politics; the division of the world has been completed; on
      the other hand, instead of the undivided monopoly of Great
      Britain, we see a few imperialist powers contending for the
      right to share in this monopoly, and this struggle is
      characteristic of the whole period of the early twentieth
      century. Opportunism cannot now be completely triumphant in the
      working-class movement of one country for decades as it was in
      Britain in the second half of the nineteenth century; but in a
      number of countries it has grown ripe, overripe, and rotten, and
      has become completely merged with bourgeois policy in the form
      of
&#8220;social-chauvinism&#8221;.[14]

     

    

    Notes

     

[1]

Hobson,
      op. cit., pp. 59, 62.
&#8212;Lenin

[2]

Schulze-Gaevernitz, Britischer Imperialismus, S. 320 et
      seq.
&#8212;Lenin

[3]

Sartorius von Waltershausen, Das
      volkswirtschaftliche System, etc., Berlin, 1907, Buch IV.
&#8212;Lenin

[4]

Schilder, op. cit., S. 393.
&#8212;Lenin

[5]

Schulze-Gaevernitz, op. cit., S. 122.
&#8212;Lenin

[6]

Die
      Bank, 1911, 1, S. 10-11.
&#8212;Lenin

[7]

Hobson,
      op. cit., pp. 103, 205, 144, 335, 386.
&#8212;Lenin

[8]

Gerhard
      Hildebrand, Die Ersch&#252;tterung der Industrieherrschaft
      und des Industriesozialismus, 1910, S. 229 et seq.
&#8212;Lenin

[9]

Schulze-Gaevernitz, Britischer Imperialismus S. 301.
&#8212;Lenin

[10]

Statistik des Deutschen Reichs, Bd. 211.
&#8212;Lenin

[11]

Henger, Die Kapitalsanlage der Franzosen, Stuttgart,
      1913.
&#8212;Lenin

[12]

Hourwich, Immigralion and Labour, New York, 1913.
&#8212;Lenin

[13]

Briefwechsel von Marx und Engels, Bd. II, S. 290; 1V,
      433&#8212;Karl Kautsky, Sozialismus und
      Kolonialpolitik, Berlin, 1907, S. 79; this pamphlet was
      written by Kautsky in those infinitely distant days when he was
      still a Marxist.
&#8212;Lenin

[14]

Russian social-chauvinism in its overt form, represented by the
      Potresovs, Chkenkelis, Maslovs, etc., and its covert form
      (Chkeidze, Skobelev, Axelrod, Martov, etc.) also emerged from
      the Russian variety of opportunism, namely, liquidationism.
&#8212;Lenin

     

[15]

[PLACEHOLDER.]

    

     

            
          

VII. IMPERIALISM AS A SPECIAL STAGE OF CAPITALISM

          |

          

IX. CRITIQUE OF IMPERIALISM

            

           

    

    
      
	

	  

	    
	      <
		  backward

	       &#160; &#160; 
	      Contents
	       &#160; &#160; 

	      forward >
	    

	  
	  

	    
	      Works
		  Index   |  

	      Volume 22
	    

	     | 

	    
	      Collected Works

	        |   L.I.A. Index
	    
	  
	
      
    

    &#160;


## ch09

Lenin: 1916/imp-hsc: IX. CRITIQUE OF IMPERIALISM

    
	
    
    

    
    
  

  

    Vladimir Ilyich Lenin

    Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism

    A POPULAR OUTLINE

    

    

   

	     IX. CRITIQUE OF IMPERIALISM

By the critique of imperialism, in the broad sense of the term,
    we mean the attitude of the different classes of society towards
    imperialist policy in connection with their general ideology.

The enormous dimensions of finance capital concentrated in a
    few hands and creating an extraordinarily dense and widespread
    network of relationships and connections which subordinates not
    only the small and medium, but also the very small capitalists and
    small masters, on the one hand, and the increasingly intense
    struggle waged against other national state groups of financiers
    for the division of the world and domination over other countries,
    on the other hand, cause the propertied classes to go over
    entirely to the side of imperialism. &#8220;General&#8221; enthusiasm over the
    prospects of imperialism, furious defence of it and painting it in
    the brightest colours&#8212;such are the signs of the
    times. Imperialist ideology also penetrates the working class. No
    Chinese Wall separates it from the other classes. The leaders of
    the present-day, so-called, &#8220;Social-Democratic&#8221; Party of Germany
    are justly called &#8220;social-imperialists,&#8221; that is, socialists in
    words and imperialists in deeds; but

   

as early as 1902, Hobson
    noted the existence in Britain of &#8220;Fabian imperialists&#8221; who
    belonged to the opportunist Fabian Society.

Bourgeois scholars and publicists usually come out in defence
    of imperialism in a somewhat veiled form; they obscure its
    complete domination and its deep-going roots, strive to push
    specific and secondary details into the forefront and do their
    very best to distract attention from essentials by means of
    absolutely ridiculous schemes for &#8220;reform,&#8221; such as police
    supervision of the trusts or banks, etc. Cynical and frank
    imperialists who are bold enough to admit the absurdity of the
    idea of reforming the fundamental characteristics of imperialism
    are a rarer phenomenon.

Here is an example. The German imperialists attempt, in the
    magazine Archives of World Economy, to follow the
    national emancipation movements in the colonies, particularly, of
    course, in colonies other than those belonging to Germany. They
    note the unrest and the protest movements in India, the movement
    in Natal (South Africa), in the Dutch East Indies, etc. One of
    them, commenting on an English report of a conference held on June
    28-30, 1910, of representatives of various subject nations and
    races, of peoples of Asia, Africa and Europe who are under foreign
    rule, writes as follows in appraising the speeches delivered at
    this conference: &#8220;We are told that we must fight imperialism; that
    the ruling states should recognise the right of subject peoples to
    independence; that an international tribunal should supervise the
    fulfilment of treaties concluded between the great powers and weak
    peoples. Further than the expression of these pious wishes they do
    not go. We see no trace of understanding of the fact that
    imperialism is inseparably bound up with capitalism in its present
    form and that, therefore [!!], an open struggle against
    imperialism would be hopeless, unless, perhaps, the fight were to
    be confined to protests against certain of its especially
    abhorrent
excesses.&#8221; [1]

Since the reform of the basis of
    imperialism is a deception, a &#8220;pious wish&#8221;, since the bourgeois
    representatives of the oppressed nations go no

   

&#8220;further&#8221; forward,
    the bourgeois representative of an oppressing nation goes
    &#8220;further&#8221; backward, to servility towards imperialism
    under cover of the claim to be &#8220;scientific.&#8221; That is also
    &#8220;logic&#8221;!

The questions as to whether it is possible to reform the basis
    of imperialism, whether to go forward to the further
    intensification and deepening of the antagonisms which it
    engenders, or backward, towards allaying these antagonisms, are
    fundamental questions in the critique of imperialism. Since the
    specific political features of imperialism are reaction everywhere
    and increased national oppression due to the oppression of the
    financial oligarchy and the elimination of free competition, a
    petty-bourgeois-democratic opposition to imperialism arose at
    the beginning of the twentieth century in nearly all imperialist
    countries. Kautsky not only did not trouble to oppose, was not
    only unable to oppose this petty-bourgeois reformist opposition,
    which is really reactionary in its economic basis, but became
    merged with it in practice, and this is precisely where Kautsky
    and the broad international Kautskian trend deserted Marxism.

In the United States, the imperialist war waged against Spain
    in 1898 stirred up the opposition of the &#8220;anti-imperialists,&#8221; the
    last of the Mohicans of bourgeois democracy who declared this war
    to be &#8220;criminal,&#8221; regarded the annexation of foreign territories
    as a violation of the Constitution, declared that the treatment of
    Aguinaldo, leader of the Filipinos (the Americans promised him the
    independence of his country, but later landed troops and annexed
    it), was &#8220;jingo treachery&#8221;, and quoted the words of Lincoln: &#8220;When
    the white man governs himself, that is self-government; but when
    he governs himself and also governs others, it is no longer
    self-government; it is
despotism.&#8221; [2]

But as long as all this criticism
    shrank from recognising the inseverable bond between imperialism
    and the trusts, and, therefore, between imperialism and the
    foundations of capitalism, while it shrank from joining the forces
    engendered by large-scale capitalism and its development, it
    remained a &#8220;pious wish&#8221;.

  

This is also the main attitude taken by Hobson in his critique
    of imperialism. Hobson anticipated Kautsky in protesting against
    the &#8220;inevitability of imperialism&#8221; argument, and in urging the
    necessity of &#8220;increasing the consuming capacity&#8221; of the people
    (under capitalism!). The petty-bourgeois point of view in the
    critique of imperialism, the omnipotence of the banks, the
    financial oligarchy, etc., is adopted by the authors I have often
    quoted, such as Agahd, A. Lansburgh, L. Eschwege, and among the
    French writers Victor Berard, author of a superficial book
    entitled England and Imperialism which appeared in
    1900. All these authors, who make no claim to be Marxists,
    contrast imperialism with free competition and democracy, condemn
    the Baghdad railway scheme, which is leading to conflicts and war,
    utter &#8220;pious wishes&#8221; for peace, etc. This applies also to the
    compiler of international stock and share issue statistics,
    A. Neymarck, who, after calculating the thousands of millions of
    francs representing &#8220;international&#8221; securities, exclaimed in 1912:
    &#8220;Is it possible to believe that peace may be disturbed ... that,
    in the face of these enormous figures, anyone would risk starting
    a
war?&#8221; [3]

Such simple-mindedness on the part of the bourgeois economists
    is not surprising; moreover, it is in their interest to
    pretend to be so naive and to talk &#8220;seriously&#8221; about peace under
    imperialism. But what remains of Kautsky&#8217;s Marxism, when, in 1914,
    1915 and 1916, he takes up the same bourgeois-reformist point of
    view and affirms that &#8220;everybody is agreed&#8221; (imperialists, 
pseudo-socialists and social-pacifists) on the matter of peace? Instead
    of an analysis of imperialism and an exposure of the depths of its
    contradictions, we have nothing but a reformist &#8220;pious wish&#8221; to
    wave them aside, to evade them.

Here is a sample of Kautsky&#8217;s economic criticism of
    imperialism. He takes the statistics of the British export and
    import trade with Egypt for 1872 and 1912; it seems that this
    export and import trade has grown more slowly than British foreign
    trade as a whole. From this Kautsky concludes that &#8220;we have no
    reason to suppose that without

   

military occupation the growth of
    British trade with Egypt would have been less, simply as a result
    of the mere operation of economic factors.&#8221; &#8220;The urge of capital
    to expand ... can be best promoted, not by the violent methods of
    imperialism, but by peaceful
democracy.&#8221; [4]

This argument of Kautsky&#8217;s, which is repeated in every key by
    his Russian armour-bearer (and Russian shielder of the
    social-chauvinists),
Mr.&#160;Spectator, constitutes the basis of
    Kautskian critique of imperialism, and that is why we must deal
    with it in greater detail. We will begin with a quotation from
    Hilferding, whose conclusions Kautsky on many occasions, and
    notably in April 1915, has declared to have been &#8220;unanimously
    adopted by all socialist theoreticians.&#8221;

&#8220;It is not the business of the proletariat,&#8221; writes Hilferding
    &#8220;to contrast the more progressive capitalist policy with that of
    the now bygone era of free trade and of hostility towards the
    state. The reply of the proletariat to the economic policy of
    finance capital, to imperialism, cannot be free trade, but
    socialism. The aim of proletarian policy cannot today be the ideal
    of restoring free competition&#8212;which has now become a
    reactionary ideal&#8212;but the complete elimination of
    competition by the abolition of
capitalism.&#8221; [5]

Kautsky broke with Marxism by advocating in the epoch of
    finance capital a &#8220;reactionary ideal,&#8221; &#8220;peaceful democracy,&#8221; &#8220;the
    mere operation of economic factors,&#8221; for objectively this
    ideal drags us back from monopoly to non-monopoly capitalism, and
    is a reformist swindle.

Trade with Egypt (or with any other colony or semi-colony)
    &#8220;would have grown more&#8221; without military occupation,
    without imperialism, and without finance capital. What does this
    mean? That capitalism would have developed more rapidly if free
    competition had not been restricted by monopolies in general, or
    by the &#8220;connections,&#8221; yoke (i.e., also the monopoly) of finance
    capital, or by the monopolist possession of colonies by certain
    countries?

Kautsky&#8217;s argument can have no other meaning; and

   

this &#8220;meaning&#8221; is meaningless. Let us assume that free
    competition, without any sort of monopoly, would have developed
    capitalism and trade more rapidly. But the more rapidly trade and
    capitalism develop, the greater is the concentration of production
    and capital which gives rise to monopoly. And monopolies
    have already arisen&#8212;precisely out of free
    competition! Even if monopolies have now begun to retard progress,
    it is not an argument in favour of free competition, which has
    become impossible after it has given rise to monopoly.

Whichever way one turns Kautsky&#8217;s argument, one will find
    nothing in it except reaction and bourgeois reformism.

Even if we correct this argument and say, as Spectator says,
    that the trade of the colonies with Britain is now developing more
    slowly than their trade with other countries, it does not save
    Kautsky; for it is also monopoly, also
    imperialism that is beating Great Britain, only it is the
    monopoly and imperialism of another country (America, Germany). It
    is known that the cartels have given rise to a new and peculiar
    form of protective tariffs, i.e., goods suitable for export are
    protected (Engels noted this in Vol.&#160;III of
Capital[12]). It
    is known, too, that the cartels add finance capital have a system
    peculiar to themselves, that of &#8220;exporting goods at cut-rate
    prices&#8221;, or &#8220;dumping,&#8221; as the English call it: within a given
    country the cartel sells its goods at high monopoly prices, but
    sells them abroad at a much lower price to undercut the
    competitor, to enlarge its own production to the utmost, etc. If
    Germany&#8217;s trade with the British colonies is developing more
    rapidly than Great Britain&#8217;s, it only proves that German
    imperialism is younger, stronger and better organised than British
    imperialism, is superior to it; but it by no means proves the
    &#8220;superiority&#8221; of free trade, for it is not a fight between free
    trade and protection and colonial dependence, but between two
    rival imperialisms, two monopolies, two groups of finance
    capital. The superiority of German imperialism over British
    imperialism is more potent than the wall of colonial frontiers or
    of protective tariffs: to use this as an &#8220;argument&#8221; in favour
    of free trade and &#8220;peaceful democracy&#8221; is banal, it means
    forgetting the essential features and characteristics

   

of
    imperialism, substituting petty-bourgeois reformism for
    Marxism.

It is interesting to note that even the bourgeois economist,
    A. Lansburgh, whose criticism of imperialism is as petty-bourgeois
    as Kautsky&#8217;s, nevertheless got closer to a more scientific study
    of trade statistics. He did not compare one single country, chosen
    at random, and one single colony with the other countries; he
    examined the export trade of an imperialist country: (1) with
    countries which are financially dependent upon it, and borrow
    money from it; and (2) with countries which are financially
    independent. He obtained the following results:

    
      
	  
	    EXPORT TRADE OF GERMANY (000,000 marks)
	  
	  
	    To countries financially
	      
dependent on 
Germany

	    1889
	    1908
	    Per cent
increase
	  
	  
	    Rumania
	    48.2
	    70.8
	    47
	  
	  
	    Portugal
	    19.0
	    32.8
	    73
	  
	  
	    Argentina
	    60.7
	    147.0
	    143
	  
	  
	    Brazil
	    48.7
	    84.5
	    73
	  
	  
	    Chile
	    28.3
	    64.0
	    114
	  
	  
	    Total
	    234.8
	    451.5
	    92
	  
	  
	    To
	      countries
financially
independent
of Germany

	     
	     
	     
	  
	  
	    Great Britain
	    651.8
	    997.4
	    53
	  
	  
	    France
	    210.2
	    437.9
	    108
	  
	  
	    Belgium
	    137.2
	    322.8
	    135
	  
	  
	    Switzerland
	    177.4
	    401.1
	    127
	  
	  
	    Australia
	    21.2
	    64.5
	    205
	  
	  
	    Dutch East 
Indies
	    8.8
	    40.7
	    363
	  
	  
	    Total
	    1,206.6
	    2,264.4
	    87
	  
      
    

Lansburgh did not draw conclusions and therefore,
    strangely enough, failed to observe that if the figures prove
    anything at all, they prove that he is wrong, for the
    exports to countries financially dependent on Germany have grown
    more rapidly, if only slightly, than exports to the
    countries which are financially independent. (I emphasise the
    &#8220;if&#8221;, for Lansburgh&#8217;s figures are far from complete.)

Tracing the connection between exports and loans, Lansburgh
    writes:

&#8220;In 1890-91, a Rumanian loan was floated through the German
    banks, which had already in previous years made

   

advances on this
loan. It was used chiefly to purchase railway materials in
Germany. In 1891, German exports to Rumania amounted to 55 million
    marks. The following year they dropped to 39.4 million marks and,
    with fluctuations, to 25.4 million in 1900. Only in very recent
    years have they regained the level of 1891, thanks to two new
    loans.

&#8220;German exports to Portugal rose, following the loans of 1888-
    to 21,100,000 (1890); then, in the two following years, they
    dropped to 16,200,000 and 7,400,000, and regained their former
    level only in 1903.

&#8220;The figures of German trade with Argentina are still more
    striking. Loans were floated in 1888 and 1890; German exports to
    Argentina reached 60,700,000 marks (1889). Two years later they
    amounted to only 18,600,000 marks, less than one-third of the
    previous figure. It was not until 1901 that they regained and
    surpassed the level of 1889, and then only as a result of new
    loans floated by the state and by municipalities, with advances to
    build power stations, and with other credit operations.

&#8220;Exports to Chile, as a consequence of the loan of 1889, rose
    to 45,200,000 marks (in 1892), and a year later dropped to
    22,500,000 marks. A new Chilean loan floated by the German banks
    in 1906 was followed by a rise of exports to 84,700,000 marks in
    1907, only to fall again to 52,400,000 marks in
1908.&#8221; [6]

From these facts Lansburgh draws the amusing petty-bourgeois
    moral of how unstable and irregular export trade is when it is
    bound up with loans, how bad it is to invest capital abroad
    instead of &#8220;naturally&#8221; and &#8220;harmoniously&#8221; developing home
    industry, how &#8220;costly&#8221; are the millions in bakshish that Krupp has
    to pay in floating foreign loans, etc. But the facts tell us
    clearly: the increase in exports is connected with just these
    swindling tricks of finance capital, which is not concerned
    with bourgeois morality, but with skinning the ox twice&#8212;first, it pockets the profits from the loan; then it pockets other
    profits from the same loan which the borrower uses to
    make purchases from Krupp, or to purchase railway material from
    the Steel Syndicate, etc.

  

I repeat that I do not by any means consider Lansburgh&#8217;s
    figures to be perfect; but I had to quote them because they are
    more scientific than Kautsky&#8217;s and Spectator&#8217;s and because
    Lansburgh showed the correct way to approach the question. In
    discussing the significance of finance capital in regard to
    exports, etc., one must be able to single out the connection of
    exports especially and solely with the tricks of the financiers,
    especially and solely with the sale of goods by cartels,
    etc. Simply to compare colonies with non-colonies, one imperialism
    with another imperialism, one semi-colony or colony (Egypt) with
    all other countries, is to evade and to obscure the very
    essence of the question.

Kautsky&#8217;s theoretical critique of imperialism has nothing in
    common with Marxism and serves only as a preamble to propaganda
    for peace and unity with the opportunists and the
    social-chauvinists, precisely for the reason that it evades and
    obscures the very profound and fundamental contradictions of
    imperialism: the contradictions between monopoly and free
    competition which exists side by side with it, between the
    gigantic &#8220;operations&#8221; (and gigantic profits) of finance capital
    and &#8220;honest&#8221; trade in the free market, the contradiction between
    cartels and trusts, on the one hand, and non-cartelised industry,
    on the other, etc.

The notorious theory of &#8220;ultra-imperialism,&#8221; invented by
    Kautsky, is just as reactionary. Compare his arguments on this
    subject in 1915, with Hobson&#8217;s arguments in 1902.

Kautsky: &#8220;... Cannot the present imperialist policy be
    supplanted by a new, ultra-imperialist policy, which will
    introduce the joint exploitation of the world by internationally
    united finance capital in place of the mutual rivalries of
    national finance capitals? Such a new phase of capitalism is at
    any rate conceivable. Can it be achieved? Sufficient premises are
    still lacking to enable us to answer this
question.&#8221; [7]

Hobson: &#8220;Christendom thus laid out in a few great federal
    empires, each with a retinue of uncivilised dependencies, seems to
    many the most legitimate development of present

   

tendencies, and
    one which would offer the best hope of permanent peace on an
    assured basis of inter-imperialism.&#8221;

Kautsky called ultra-imperialism or super-imperialism what
    Hobson, thirteen years earlier, described as inter-
    imperialism. Except for coining a new and clever catchword,
    replacing one Latin prefix by another, the only progress Kautsky
    has made in the sphere of &#8220;scientific&#8221; thought is that he gave out
    as Marxism what Hobson, in effect, described as the cant of
    English parsons.

    After the Anglo-Boer War it was quite natural for this highly
    honourable caste to exert their main efforts to console
    the British middle class and the workers who had lost many of
    their relatives on the battlefields of South Africa and who were
    obliged to pay higher taxes in order to guarantee still higher
    profits for the British financiers. And what better consolation
    could there be than the theory that imperialism is not so bad;
    that it stands close to inter- (or ultra-) imperialism, which can
    ensure permanent peace? No matter what the good intentions of the
    English parsons, or of sentimental Kautsky, may have been, the
    only objective, i.e., real, social significance of Kautsky&#8217;s
    &#8220;theory&#8221; is this: it is a most reactionary method of consoling the
    masses with hopes of permanent peace being possible under
    capitalism, by distracting their attention from the sharp
    antagonisms and acute problems of the present times, and directing
    it towards illusory prospects of an imaginary &#8220;ultraimperialism&#8221;
    of the future. Deception of the masses&#8212;that is all there is
    in Kautsky&#8217;s &#8220;Marxist&#8221; theory.

Indeed, it is enough to compare well-known and indisputable
    facts to become convinced of the utter falsity of the prospects
    which Kautsky tries to conjure up before the German workers (and
    the workers of all lands). Let us consider India, Indo-China and
    China. It is known that these three colonial and semi-colonial
    countries, with a population of six to seven hundred million, are
    subjected to the exploitation of the finance capital of several
    imperialist powers: Great Britain, France, Japan, the U.S.A.,
    etc. Let us assume that these imperialist countries form alliances
    against one another in order to protect or enlarge their
    possessions, their interests and their spheres of influence in
    these Asiatic states; these alliances will be &#8220;inter-imperialist&#8221;,
    or &#8220;ultra-imperialist&#8221;

   

alliances. Let us assume that all the imperialist countries
conclude an alliance for the
    &#8220;peaceful&#8221; division of these parts of Asia; this alliance would be
    an alliance of &#8220;internationally united finance capital.&#8221; There are
    actual examples of alliances of this kind in the history of the
    twentieth century&#8212;the attitude of the powers to China, for
    instance. We ask, is it &#8220;conceivable,&#8221; assuming that the
    capitalist system remains intact&#8212;and this is precisely the
    assumption that Kautsky does make&#8212;that such alliances would
    be more than temporary, that they would eliminate friction,
    conflicts and struggle in every possible form?

The question has only to be presented clearly for any other
    than a negative answer to be impossible. This is because the only
    conceivable basis under capitalism for the division of spheres of
    influence, interests, colonies, etc., is a calculation of the
    strength of those participating, their general economic,
    financial, military strength, etc. And the strength of these
    participants in the division does not change to an equal degree,
    for the even development of different undertakings,
    trusts, branches  of industry, or countries is impossible under
    capitalism. Half a century ago Germany was a miserable,
    insignificant country, if her capitalist strength is compared with
    that of the Britain of that time; Japan compared with Russia in
    the same way. Is it &#8220;conceivable&#8221; that in ten or twenty years&#8217;
    time the relative strength of the imperialist powers will have
    remained unchanged? It is out of the question.

Therefore, in the realities of the capitalist system, and not
    in the banal philistine fantasies of English parsons, or of the
    German &#8220;Marxist,&#8221; Kautsky, &#8220;inter-imperialist&#8221; or &#8220;ultra-imperialist&#8221;
    alliances, no matter what form they may assume,
    whether of one imperialist coalition against another, or of a
    general alliance embracing all the imperialist powers,
    are inevitably nothing more than a &#8220;truce&#8221; in periods
    between wars. Peaceful alliances prepare the ground for wars, and
    in their turn grow out of wars; the one conditions the other,
    producing alternating forms of peaceful and non-peaceful struggle
    on one and the same basis of imperialist connections and
    relations within world economics and world politics. But in order
    to pacify the workers and reconcile them with the social-chauvinists
    who have

   

deserted to the side of the bourgeoisie,
    over-wise Kautsky separates one link of a single chain
    from another, separates the present peaceful (and
    ultra-imperialist, nay, ultra-ultra-imperialist) alliance of
    all the powers for the &#8220;pacification&#8221; of China (remember
    the suppression of the Boxer
Rebellion) from the non-peaceful conflict of
	tomorrow, which will prepare the ground for another &#8220;peaceful&#8221;
	general alliance for the partition, say, of Turkey, on the day
	after tomorrow, etc., etc. Instead of showing the
	living connection between periods of imperialist peace and
	periods of imperialist war, Kautsky presents the workers with
	a lifeless abstraction in order to reconcile them to their
	lifeless leaders.

An American writer, Hill, in his A History of the Diplomacy
    in the International Development of Europe refers in his
    preface to the following periods in the recent history of
    diplomacy: (1) the era of revolution; (2) the constitutional
    movement; (3) the present era of &#8220;commercial
imperialism.&#8221; [8]

Another
    writer divides the history of Great Britain&#8217;s &#8220;world policy&#8221; since
    1870 into four periods: (1) the first Asiatic period (that of the
    struggle against Russia&#8217;s advance in Central Asia towards India);
    (2) the African period (approximately 1885-1902): that of the
    struggle against France for the partition of Africa (the &#8220;Fashoda
    incident&#8221; of 1898 which brought her within a hair&#8217;s breadth of war
    with France); (3) the second Asiatic period (alliance with Japan
    against Russia); and (4) the &#8220;European&#8221; period, chiefly
    anti-German. [9]

&#8220;The political patrol clashes take
    place on the financial field,&#8221; wrote the banker, Riesser, in 1905,
    in showing how French finance capital operating in Italy was
    preparing the way for a political alliance of these countries, and
    how a conflict was developing between Germany and Great Britain
    over Persia, between all the European capitalists over Chinese
    loans, etc. Behold, the living reality of peaceful
    &#8220;ultra-imperialist&#8221; alliances in their inseverable connection with
    ordinary imperialist conflicts!

Kautsky&#8217;s obscuring of the deepest contradictions of

   

    imperialism, which inevitably boils down to painting imperialism
    in bright colours, leaves its traces in this writer&#8217;s criticism of
    the political features of imperialism. Imperialism is the epoch of
    finance capital and of monopolies, which introduce everywhere the
    striving for domination, not for freedom. Whatever the political
    system, the result of these tendencies is everywhere reaction and
    an extreme intensification of antagonisms in this
    field. Particularly intensified become the yoke of national
    oppression and the striving for annexations, i.e., the violation
    of national independence (for annexation is nothing but the
    violation of the right of nations to
    self-determination). Hilferding rightly notes the connection
    between imperialism and the intensification of national
    oppression. &#8220;In the newly opened-up countries,&#8221; he writes, &#8220;the
    capital imported into them intensifies antagonisms and excites
    against the intruders the constantly growing resistance of the
    peoples who are awakening to national consciousness; this
    resistance can easily develop into dangerous measures against
    foreign capital. The old social relations become completely
    revolutionised, the age-long agrarian isolation of &#8216;nations
    without history&#8217; is destroyed and they are drawn into the
    capitalist whirlpool. Capitalism itself gradually provides the
    subjugated with the means and resources for their emancipation and
    they set out to achieve the goal which once seemed highest to the
    European nations: the creation of a united national state as a
    means to economic and cultural freedom. This movement for national
    independence threatens European capital in its most valuable and
    most promising fields of exploitation, and European capital can
    maintain its domination only by continually increasing its
    military
forces.&#8221; [10]

To this must be added that it is not only in newly opened-up
    countries, but also in the old, that imperialism is leading to
    annexation, to increased national oppression, and, consequently,
    also to increasing resistance. While objecting

   

to the
    intensification of political reaction by imperialism, Kautsky
    leaves in the shade a question that has become particularly
    urgent, viz., the impossibility of unity with the opportunists in
    the epoch of imperialism. While objecting to annexations, he
    presents his objections in a form that is most acceptable and
    least offensive to the opportunists. He addresses himself to a
    German audience, yet he obscures the most topical and important
    point, for instance, the annexation of Alsace-Lorraine by
    Germany. In order to appraise this &#8220;mental aberration&#8221; of
    Kautsky&#8217;s I shall take the following example. Let us suppose that
    a Japanese condemns the annexation of the Philippines by the
    Americans. The question is: will many believe that he does so
    because he has a horror of annexations as such, and not because he
    himself has a desire to annex the Philippines? And shall we not be
    constrained to admit that the &#8220;fight&#8221; the Japanese is waging
    against annexations can be regarded as being sincere and
    politically honest only if he fights against the annexation of
    Korea by Japan, and urges freedom for Korea to secede from
    Japan?

Kautsky&#8217;s theoretical analysis of imperialism, as well as his
    economic and political critique of imperialism, are permeated
    through and through with a spirit, absolutely
    irreconcilable with Marxism, of obscuring and glossing over the
    fundamental contradictions of imperialism and with a striving to
    preserve at all costs the crumbling unity with opportunism in the
    European working-class movement.

     

    

    Notes

     

[1]

Weltwirtschaffliches Archiv, Bd. II, S. 193.
&#8212;Lenin

[2]

J. Patouillet,
    L&#8217;imp&eacute;rialisme am&eacute;ricain, Dijon, 1904,
    p. 272.
&#8212;Lenin

[3]

  Bulletin de l&#8217;Institut
    International de Statistique, T. XIX, Lvr. II,
    p. 225.
&#8212;Lenin

[4]

Kautsky, Nationalstaat,
    imperialistischer Staat und Staatenbund, N&uuml;rnberg, 1915,
    S. 72, 70.
&#8212;Lenin

[5]

  Finance Capital, p. 567.
&#8212;Lenin

[6]

  Die Bank, 1909, 2, S. 819
    et seq.
&#8212;Lenin

[7]

  Die Neue Zeit, April 30,
    1915, S. 144.
&#8212;Lenin

[8]

David Jayne Hill, History of the
    Diplomacy in the International Development of Europe, Vol. I,
    p. X.
&#8212;Lenin

[9]

Schilder, op. cit., S. 178.
&#8212;Lenin

[10]

Finance Capital,
    p. 487.
&#8212;Lenin

     

[11]
[PLACEHOLDER.]

[12]
[PLACEHOLDER.]

[13]
[PLACEHOLDER.]

    

     

            
          

VIII. PARASITISM AND DECAY OF CAPITALISM

          |

          

X. THE PLACE OF IMPERIALISM IN HISTORY

            

           

    

    
      
	

	  

	    
	      <
		  backward

	       &#160; &#160; 
	      Contents
	       &#160; &#160; 

	      forward >
	    

	  
	  

	    
	      Works
		  Index   |  

	      Volume 22
	    

	     | 

	    
	      Collected Works

	        |   L.I.A. Index
	    
	  
	
      
    

    &#160;


## ch10

Lenin: 1916/imp-hsc: X. THE PLACE OF IMPERIALISM IN HISTORY

    
    
    
    

    
    
  

  
    Vladimir Ilyich Lenin

    Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism

    A POPULAR OUTLINE

    

    X. THE PLACE OF IMPERIALISM IN HISTORY

    We have seen that in its economic essence imperialism is monopoly capitalism.This in itself determines its place in history, for monopoly that grows out of the soil of free competition, and precisely out of free competition, is the transition from the capitalist system to a higher socio-economic order.We must take special note of the four principal types of monopoly, or principal manifestations of monopoly capitalism, which are characteristic of the epoch we are examining.

    Firstly, monopoly arose out of the concentration of production at a very high stage.This refers to the monopolist capitalist associations, cartels, syndicatess, and trusts.We have seen the important part these play in present-day economic life.At the beginning of the twentieth century, monopolies had acquired complete supremacy in the advanced countries, and although the first steps towards the formation of the cartels were taken by countries enjoying the protection of high tariffs (Germany, America), Great Britain, with her system of free trade, revealed the same basic phenomenon, only a little later, namely, the birth of monopoly out of the concentration of production.

    Secondly, monopolies have stimulated the seizure of the most important sources of raw materials, especially for the basic and most highly cartelised industries in capitalist society: the coal and iron industries. The monopoly of the most important sources of raw materials has enormously increased the power of big capital, and has sharpened the antagonism between cartelised and non-cartelised industry.

    Thirdly, monopoly has sprung from the banks. The banks have developed from modest middleman enterprises into the monopolists of finance capital. Some three to five of the biggest banks in each of the foremost capitalist countries have achieved the "personal link-up" between industrial and bank capital, and have concentrated in their hands the control of thousands upon thousands of millions which form the greater part of the capital and income of entire countries. A financial oligarchy, which throws a close network of dependence relationships over all the economic and political institutions of present-day bourgeois society without exception—such is the most striking manifestation of this monopoly.

    Fourthly, monopoly has grown out of colonial policy. To the numerous "old" motives of colonial policy, finance capital has added the struggle for the sources of raw materials, for the export of capital, for spheres of influence, i.e., for spheres for profitable deals, concessions, monopoly profits and so on, economic territory in general. When the colonies of the European powers,for instance, comprised only one-tenth of the territory of Africa(as was the case in 1876), colonial policy was able to develop—by methods other than those of monopoly—by the "free grabbing" of territories, so to speak. But when nine-tenths of Africa had been seized (by 1900), when the whole world had been divided up,there was inevitably ushered in the era of monopoly possession of colonies and, consequently, of particularly intense struggle for the division and the redivision of the world.

    The extent to which monopolist capital has intensified all the contradictions of capitalism is generally known. It is sufficient to mention the high cost of living and the tyranny of the cartels. This intensification of contradictions constitutes the most powerful driving force of the transitional period of history, which began from the time of the final victory of world finance capital.

    Monopolies, oligarchy, the striving for domination and not for freedom, the exploitation of an increasing number of small or weak nations by a handful of the richest or most powerful nations—all these have given birth to those distinctive characteristics of imperialism which compel us to define it as parasitic or decaying capitalism. More and more prominently there emerges, as one of the tendencies of imperialism, the creation of the "rentier state", the usurer state, in which the bourgeoisie to an ever-increasing degree lives on the proceeds of capital exports and by "clipping coupons". It would be a mistake to believe that this tendency to decay precludes the rapid growth of capitalism. It does not. In the epoch of imperialism, certain branches of industry, certain strata of the bourgeoisie and certain countries betray, to a greater or lesser degree, now one and now another of these tendencies. On the whole, capitalism is growing far more rapidly than before; but this growth is not only becoming more and more uneven in general, its unevenness also manifests itself, in particular, in the decay of the countries which are richest in capital (Britain).

    In regard to the rapidity of Germany's economic development, Riesser, the author of the book on the big German banks, states: "The progress of the preceding period (1848-70), which had not been exactly slow, compares with the rapidity with which the whole of Germany's national economy, and with it German banking, progressed during this period (1870-1905) in about the same way as the speed of the mail coach in the good old days compares with the speed of the present-day automobile ... which is whizzing past so fast that it endangers not only innocent pedestrians in its path, but also the occupants of the car." In its turn, this finance capital which has grown with such extraordinary rapidity is not unwilling, precisely because it has grown so quickly, to pass on to a more "tranquil" possession of colonies which have to be seized—and not only by peaceful methods—from richer nations. In the United States, economic development in the last decades has been even more rapid than in Germany, and for this very reason, the parasitic features of modern American capitalism have stood out with particular prominence. On the other hand, a comparison of, say, the republican American bourgeoisie with the monarchist Japanese or German bourgeoisie shows that the most pronounced political distinction diminishes to an extreme degree in the epoch of imperialism—not because it is unimportant in general, but because in all these cases we are talking about a bourgeoisie which has definite features of parasitism.

    The receipt of high monopoly profits by the capitalists in one of the numerous branches of industry, in one of the numerous countries, etc., makes it economically possible for them to bribe certain sections of the workers, and for a time a fairly considerable minority of them, and win them to the side of the bourgeoisie of a given industry or given nation against all the others. The intensification of antagonisms between imperialist nations for the division of the world increases this urge. And so there is created that bond between imperialism and opportunism, which revealed itself first and most clearly in Great Britain, owing to the fact that certain features of imperialist development were observable there much earlier than in other countries. Some writers, L. Martov, for example, are prone to wave aside the connection between imperialism and opportunism in the working-class movement—a particularly glaring fact at the present time—by resorting to "official optimism" (à la Kautsky and Huysmans) like the following: the cause of the opponents of capitalism would be hopeless if it were progressive capitalism that led to the increase of opportunism, or, if it were the best-paid workers who were inclined towards opportunism, etc. We must have no illusions about "optimism" of this kind. It is optimism in respect of opportunism; it is optimism which serves to conceal opportunism. As a matter of fact the extraordinary rapidity and the particularly revolting character of the development of opportunism is by no means a guarantee that its victory will be durable: the rapid growth of a painful abscess on a healthy body can only cause it to burst more quickly and thus relieve the body of it. The most dangerous of all in this respect are those who do not wish to understand that the fight against imperialism is a sham and humbug unless it is inseparably bound up with the fight against opportunism.

    From all that has been said in this book on the economic essence of imperialism, it follows that we must define it as capitalism in transition, or, more precisely, as moribund capitalism. It is very instructive in this respect to note that bourgeois economists, in describing modern capitalism, frequently employ catchwords and phrases like "interlocking", "absence of isolation", etc.; "in conformity with their functions and course of development", banks are "not purely private business enterprises: they are more and more outgrowing the sphere of purely private business regulation". And this very Riesser, whose words I have just quoted, declares with all seriousness that the "prophecy" of the Marxists concerning "socialisation" has "not come true"!

    What then does this catchword "interlocking" express? It merely expresses the most striking feature of the process going on before our eyes. It shows that the observer counts the separate trees, but cannot see the wood. It slavishly copies the superficial, the fortuitous, the chaotic. It reveals the observer as one who is overwhelmed by the mass of raw material and is utterly incapable of appreciating its meaning and importance. Ownership of shares, the relations between owners of private property "interlock in a haphazard way". But underlying this interlocking, its very base, are the changing social relations of production. When a big enterprise assumes gigantic proportions, and, on the basis of an exact computation of mass data, organises according to plan the supply of primary raw materials to the extent of two-thirds, or three-fourths, of all that is necessary for tens of millions of people; when the raw materials are transported in a systematic and organised manner to the most suitable places of production, sometimes situated hundreds or thousands of miles from each other; when a single centre directs all the consecutive stages of processing the material right up to the manufacture of numerous varieties of finished articles; when these products are distributed according to a single plan among tens and hundreds of millions of consumers (the marketing of oil in America and Germany by the American oil trust)—then it becomes evident that we have socialisation of production, and not mere "interlocking", that private economic and private property relations constitute a shell which no longer fits its contents, a shell which must inevitably decay if its removal is artificially delayed, a shell which may remain in a state of decay for a fairly long period (if, at the worst, the cure of the opportunist abscess is protracted), but which will inevitably be removed.

    The enthusiastic admirer of German imperialism, Schulze-Gaevernitz, exclaims:

    "Once the supreme management of the German banks has been entrusted to the hands of a dozen persons, their activity is even today more significant for the public good than that of the majority of the Ministers of State. .. . (The "interlocking" of bankers, ministers, magnates of industry and rentiers is here conveniently forgotten.) If we imagine the development of those tendencies we have noted carried to their logical conclusion we will have: the money capital of the nation united in the banks; the banks themselves combined into cartels; the investment capital of the nation cast in the shape of securities. Then the forecast of that genius Saint-Simon will be fulfilled: 'The present anarchy of production, which corresponds to the fact that economic relations are developing without uniform regulation, must make way for organisation in production. Production will no longer be directed by isolated manufacturers, independent of each other and ignorant of man's economic needs; that will be done by a certain public institution. A central committee of management, being able to survey the large field of social economy from a more elevated point of view, will regulate it for the benefit of the whole of society, will put the means of production into suitable hands, and above all will take care that there be constant harmony between production and consumption. Institutions already exist which have assumed as part of their functions a certain organisation of economic labour, the banks.'We are still a long way from the fulfilment of Saint-Simon's forecast, but we are on the way towards it: Marxism, different from what Marx imagined, but different only in form." [1]

    A crushing "refutation" of Marx indeed, which retreats a step from Marx's precise, scientific analysis to Saint-Simon's guess-work, the guess-work of a genius, but guess-work all the same.

    

    Notes

    [1]   Grundriss der Sozialökonomik, S. 146.—Lenin

    
      
        IX. CRITIQUE OF IMPERIALISM
        |
        
      

      
        Document Index
      
    
    

    
      
        < Backwards
        
        Forwards >
      

      
        Works Index
        |
        Volume 22
        |
        Collected Works
        |
        L.I.A. Index
