THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE
by Herbert Spencer

[Public domain U.S. essay collection (1884). Modern introductions and editorial apparatus from later printings are omitted. Text cleaned from a public-domain scan (Internet Archive).]

---

THE NEW TORYISM. 

Most of those who now pass as Liberals, are Tories of a 
new type. This is a paradox which I propose to justify. 
That I may justify it, I must first point out what the two 
political parties originally were; and I must then ask the 
reader to bear with me while I remind him of facts he is 
familiar with, that I may impress on him the intrinsic na- 
tures of Toryism and Liberalism properly so called. 

Dating back to an earlier period than their names, the two 
political parties at first stood respectively for two opposed 
types of social organization, broadly distinguishable as the 
militant and the industrial — types which are characterized, 
the one by the regime of status, almost universal in ancient 
days, and the other by the regime of contract, which has 
become general in modern days, chiefly among the Western 
nations, and especially among ourselves and the Americans. 
If, instead of using the word " co-operation " in a limited 
sense, we use it in its widest sense, as signifying the com- 
bined activities of citizens under whatever system of regula- 
tion ; then these two are definable as the system of compulsory 
co-operation and the system of voluntary co-operation. The 
typical structure of the one we see in an army formed of con- 
scripts, in which the units in their several grades have to 
fulfil commands under pain of death, and receive food and 

2 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

clothing and pay, arbitrarily apportioned ; while the typical 
structure of the other we see in a body of producers or dis- 
tributors, who severally agree to specified payments in return 
for specified services, and may at will, after due notice, leave 
the organization if they do not like it. 

During social evolution in England, the distinction be- 
tween these two fundamentally-opposed forms of co-operation, 
made its appearance gradually ; but long before the names 
Tory and Whig came into use, the parties were becoming 
traceable, and their connexions with militancy and industrial- 
ism respectively, were vaguely shown. The truth is familiar 
that, here as elsewhere, it was habitually by town-populations, 
formed of workers and traders accustomed to co-operate 
under contract, that resistances were made to that coercive 
rule which characterizes co-operation under status. While, 
conversely, co-operation under status, arising from, and ad- 
justed to, chronic warfare, was supported in rural districts, 
originally peopled by military chiefs and their dependents, 
where the primitive ideas and traditions survived. More- 
over, this contrast in political leanings, shown before Whig 
and Tory principles became clearly distinguished, continued 
to be shown afterwards. At the period of the Revolution, 
" while the villages and smaller towns were monopolized by 
Tories, the larger cities, the manufacturing districts, and the 
ports of commerce, formed the strongholds of the Whigs." 
And that, spite of exceptions, the like general relation still ex- 
ists, needs no proving. 

Such were the natures of the two parties as indicated by 
their origins. Observe, now, how their natures were indi- 
cated by their early doctrines and deeds. Whiggism began 
with resistance to Charles II. and his cabal, in their efforts 
to re-establish unchecked monarchical power. The Whigs 
" regarded the monarchy as a civil institution, established by 
the nation for the benefit of all its members ; " while with the 
Tories "the monarch was the delegate of heaven." And 
these doctrines involved the beliefs, the one that subjection 

THE NEW TOEYISM. 

3 

of citizen to ruler was conditional, and the other that it was 
unconditional. Describing Whig and Tory as conceived at 
the end of the seventeenth century, some fifty years before 
he wrote his Dissertation on Parties, Bolingbroke says : — 

"The power and majesty of the people, and original contract, the 
authority and independency of Parliaments, liberty, resistance, exclu- 
sion, abdication, deposition ; these were ideas associated, at that time, 
to the idea of a Whig, and supposed by every Whig to be incommu- 
nicable, and inconsistent with the idea of a Tory. 

"Divine, hereditary, indefeasible right, lineal succession, passive 
obedience, prerogative, non-resistance, slavery, nay, and sometimes 
popery too, were associated in many minds to the idea of a Tory, and 
deemed incommunicable and inconsistent, in the same manner, with 
the idea of a Whig. " — Dissertation on Parties, p. 5. 

And if we compare these descriptions, we see that in the one 
party there was a desire to resist and decrease the coercive 
power of the ruler over the subject, and in the other party to 
maintain or increase his coercive power. This distinction in 
their aims — a distinction which transcends in meaning and 
importance all other political distinctions — was displayed in 
their early doings. Whig principles were exemplified in the 
Habeas Corpus Act, and in the measure by which judges 
were made independent of the Crown ; in defeat of the Non- 
Resisting Test Bill, which proposed for legislators and officials 
a compulsory oath that they would in no case resist the king 
by arms ; and, later, they were exemplified in the Bill of 
Rights, framed to secure subjects against monarchical aggres- 
sions. These Acts had the same intrinsic nature. The prin- 
ciple of compulsory co-operation throughout social life was 
weakened by them, and the principle of voluntary co-opera- 
tion strengthened. That at a subsequent period the policy 
of the party had the same general tendency, is well shown 
by a remark of Mr. Green concerning the period of Whig 
power after the death of Anne : — 

"Before the fifty years of their rule had passed, Englishmen had 
forgotten that it was possible to persecute for differences of religion, 

4 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

or to put down the liberty of the press, or to tamper with the adminis- 
tration of justice, or to rule without a Parliament." — Short History, p. 
705. 

And now, passing over the war-period which closed the 
last century and began this, during which that extension of 
individual freedom previously gained was lost, and the retro- 
grade movement towards the social type proper to militancy 
was shown by all kinds of coercive measures, from those 
which took by force the persons and property of citizens for 
war-purposes to those which suppressed public meetings and 
sought to gag the press, let us recall the general characters of 
those changes effected by "Whigs or Liberals after the re-es- 
tablishment of peace permitted revival of the industrial 
regime and return to its appropriate type of structure. Under 
growing Whig influence there came repeal of the laws for- 
bidding combinations among artisans as well as of those 
which interfered with their freedom of travelling. There 
was the measure by which, under Whig pressure, Dissenters 
were allowed to believe as they pleased without suffering 
certain civil penalties; and there was the Whig measure, 
carried by Tories under compulsion, which enabled Catholics 
to profess their religion without losing part of their freedom. 
The area of liberty was extended by Acts which forbade the 
buying of negroes and the holding of them in bondage. The 
East India Company's monopoly was abolished, and trade 
with the East made open to all. The political serfdom of 
the unrepresented was narrowed in area, both by the Reform 
Bill and the Municipal Reform Bill ; so that alike generally 
and locally, the many were less under the coercion of the 
few. Dissenters, no longer obliged to submit to the ecclesi- 
astical form of marriage, were made free to wed by a purely 
civil rite. Later came diminution and removal of restraints 
on the buying of foreign commodities and the employment 
of foreign vessels and foreign sailors ; and later still the re- 
moval of those burdens on the press, which were originally 
imposed to hinder the diffusion of opinion. And of all 

THE NEW TORYISM. 

5 

these changes it is unquestionable that, whether made or not 
by Liberals themselves, they were made in conformity with 
principles professed and urged by Liberals. 

But why do I enumerate facts so well known to all? 
Simply because, as intimated at the outset, it seems needful 
to remind everybody what Liberalism was in the past, that 
they may perceive its unlikeness to the so-called Liberalism 
of the present. It would be inexcusable to name these 
various measures for the purpose of pointing out the character 
common to them, were it not that in our day men have for- 
gotten their common character. They do not remember that, 
in one or other way, all these truly Liberal changes diminished 
compulsory co-operation throughout social life and increased 
voluntary co-operation. They have forgotten that, in one 
direction or other, they diminished the range of governmental 
authority, and increased the area within which each citizen 
may act unchecked. They have lost sight of the truth that 
in past times Liberalism habitually stood for individual free- 
dom versus State-coercion. 

And now comes the inquiry — How is it that Liberals have 
lost sight of this ? How is it that Liberalism, getting more 
and more into power, has grown more and more coercive in 
its legislation ? How is it that, either directly through its 
own majorities or indirectly through aid given in such cases 
to the majorities of its opponents, Liberalism has to an 
increasing extent adopted the policy of dictating the actions 
of citizens, and, by consequence, diminishing the range 
throughout which their actions remain free ? How are we 
to explain this spreading confusion of thought which has 
led it, in pursuit of what appears to be public good, to in- 
vert the method by which in earlier days it achieved public 
good? 

Unaccountable as at first sight this unconscious change of 
policy seems, we shall find that it has arisen quite naturally. 
Given the unanalytical thought ordinarily brought to bear on 
political matters, and, under existing conditions, nothing else 

c 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

was to be expected. To make this clear some parenthetic 
explanations are needful. 

From the lowest to the highest creatures, intelligence pro- 
gresses by acts of discrimination ; and it continues so to 
progress among men, from the most ignorant to the most 
cultured. To class rightly — to put in the same group 
things which are of essentially the same natures, and in other 
groups things of natures essentially different — is the funda- 
mental condition to right guidance of actions. Beginning 
with rudimentary vision, which gives warning that some 
large opaque body is passing near (just as closed eyes turned 
to the window, perceiving the shade caused by a hand put 
before them, tell us of something moving in front), the 
advance is to developed vision, which, by exactly-appreciated 
combinations of forms, colours, and motions, identifies objects 
at great distances as prey or enemies, and so makes it possible 
to improve the adjustments of conduct for securing food or 
evading death. That progressing perception of differences 
and consequent greater correctness of classing, constitutes, 
under one of its chief aspects, the growth of intelligence, is 
equally seen when we pass from the relatively simple 
physical vision to the relatively complex intellectual vision 
— the vision through the agency of which, things previously 
grouped by certain external resemblances or by certain 
extrinsic circumstances, come to be more truly grouped in 
conformity with their intrinsic structures or natures. Un- 
developed intellectual vision is just as indiscriminating and 
erroneous in its classings as undeveloped physical vision. 
Instance the early arrangement of plants into the groups, 
trees, shrubs, and herbs : size, the most conspicuous trait, 
being the ground of distinction ; and the assemblages formed 
being such as united many plants extremely unlike in their 
natures, and separated others that are near akin. Or still 
better, take the popular classification which puts together 
under the same general name, fish and shell-fish, and under 

THE NEW TORYISM. 

7 

the sub-name, shell-fish, puts together crustaceans and mol- 
luscs ; nay, which goes further, and regards as fish the ceta- 
cean mammals. Partly because of the likeness in their 
modes of life as inhabiting the water, and partly because of 
some general resemblance in their flavours, creatures that 
are in their essential natures far more widely separated than 
a fish is from a bird, are associated in the same class and in 
the same sub-class. 

Now the general truth thus exemplified, holds through- 
out those higher ranges of intellectual vision concerned with 
things not presentable to the senses, and, among others, such 
things as political institutions and political measures. For 
when thinking of these, too, the results of inadequate in- 
tellectual faculty, or inadequate culture of it, or both, are 
erroneous classings and consequent erroneous conclusions. 
Indeed, the liability to error is here much greater ; since the 
things with which the intellect is concerned do not admit of 
examination in the same easy way. You cannot touch or 
see a political institution : it can be known only by an effort 
of constructive imagination. Neither can you apprehend by 
physical perception a political measure : this no less requires 
a process of mental representation by which its elements are 
put together in thought, and the essential nature of the com- 
bination conceived. Here, therefore, still more than in the 
cases above named, defective intellectual vision is shown in 
grouping by external characters, or extrinsic circumstances. 
How institutions are wrongly classed from this cause, we see 
in the common notion that the Roman Republic was a popu- 
lar form of government. Look into the early ideas of the 
French revolutionists who aimed at an ideal state of freedom, 
and you find that the political forms and deeds of the Ro- 
mans were their models ; and even now a historian might be 
named who instances the corruptions of the Roman Republic 
as showing us what popular government leads to. Yet the 
resemblance between the institutions of the Romans and free 
institutions properly so-called, was less than that between a 

8 

THE MAN VEBSUS THE STATE. 

shark and a porpoise — a resemblance of general external form 
accompanying widely different internal structures. For the 
Roman Government was that of a small oligarchy within a 
larger oligarchy : the members of each being unchecked auto- 
crats. A society in which the relatively few men who had 
political power, and were in a qualified sense free, were so 
many petty despots, holding not only slaves and dependents 
but even children in a bondage no less absolute than that in 
which they held their cattle, was, by its intrinsic nature, 
more nearly allied to an ordinary despotism than to a society 
of citizens politically equal. 

Passing now to our special question, we may understand 
the kind of confusion in which Liberalism has lost itself : 
and the origin of those mistaken classings of political meas- 
ures which have misled it — classings, as we shall see, by con- 
spicuous external traits instead of by internal natures. For 
what, in the popular apprehension and in the apprehension 
of those who effected them, were the changes made by Lib- 
erals in the past ? They were abolitions of grievances suf- 
fered by the people, or by portions of them : this was the 
common trait they had which most impressed itself on men's 
minds. They were mitigations of evils which had directly 
or indirectly been felt by large classes of citizens, as causes 
to misery or as hindrances to happiness. And since, in the 
minds of most, a rectified evil is equivalent to an achieved 
good, these measures came to be thought of as so many posi- 
tive benefits ; and the welfare of the many came to be con- 
ceived alike by Liberal statesmen and Liberal voters as the 
aim of Liberalism. Hence the confusion. The gaining of 
a popular good, being the external conspicuous trait common 
to Liberal measures in earlier days (then in each case gained 
by a relaxation of restraints), it has happened that popular 
good has come to be sought by Liberals, not as an end to be 
indirectly gained by relaxations of restraints, but as the end to 
be directly gained. And seeking to gain it directly, they have 
used methods intrinsically opposed to those originally used. 

THE NEW TOEYISM. 

9 

And now, having seen how this reversal of policy has 
arisen (or partial reversal, I should say, for the recent Burials 
Act and the efforts to remove all remaining religious inequali- 
ties, show continuance of the original policy in certain direc- 
tions), let us proceed to contemplate the extent to which it 
has been carried during recent times, and the still greater 
extent to which the future will see it carried if current ideas 
and feelings continue to predominate. 

Before proceeding, it may be well to say that no reflec- 
tions are intended on the motives which prompted one after 
another of these various restraints and dictations. These 
motives were doubtless in nearly all cases good. It must be 
admitted that the restrictions placed by an Act of 1870, on 
the employment of women and children in Turkey-red dyeing 
works, were, in intention, no less philanthropic than those of 
Edward VL, which prescribed the minimum time for which 
a journeymen should be retained. Without question, the 
Seed Supply (Ireland) Act of 1880, which empowered guard- 
ians to buy seed for poor tenants, and then to see it properly 
planted, was moved by a desire for public welfare no less 
great than that which in 1533 prescribed the number of 
sheep a tenant might keep, or that of 1597, which com- 
manded that decayed houses of husbandry should be rebuilt. 
Xobody will dispute that the various measures of late years 
taken for restricting the sale of intoxicating liquors, have 
been taken as much with a view to public morals as were the 
measures taken of old for checking the evils of luxury ; as, 
for instance, in the fourteenth century, when diet as well as 
dress was restricted. Everyone must see that the edicts 
issued by Henry VIII. to prevent the lower classes from 
playing dice, cards, bowls, &c, were not more prompted by 
desire for popular welfare than were the acts passed of late 
to check gambling. 

Further, I do not intend here to question the wisdom of 
these modern interferences, which Conservatives and Liberals 

10 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

vie with one and other in multiplying, any more than to ques- 
tion the wisdom of those ancient ones which they in many 
cases resemble. "We will not now consider whether the plans 
of late adopted for preserving the lives of sailors, are or are 
not more judicious than that sweeping Scotch measure 
which, in the middle of the fifteenth century, prohibited 
captains from leaving harbor during the winter. For the 
present, it shall remain undebated whether there is a better 
warrant for giving sanitary officers powers to search certain 
premises for unfit food, than there was for the law of 
Edward III., under which innkeepers at seaports were sworn 
to search their guests to prevent the exportation of money or 
plate. We will assume that there is no less sense in that 
clause of the Canal-boat Act, which forbids an owner to 
board gratuitously the children of the boatmen, than there 
was in the Spitalfields Acts, which, up to 1824, for the benefit 
of the artisans, forbade the manufacturers to fix their factories 
more than ten miles from the Royal Exchange. 

We exclude, then, these questions of philanthropic motive 
and wise judgment, taking both of them for granted ; and 
have here to concern ourselves solely with the compulsory 
nature of the measures which, for good or evil as the case 
may be, have been put in force during periods of Liberal 
ascendency. 

To bring the illustrations within compass, let us com- 
mence with 1860, under the second administration of Lord 
Palmerston. In that year, the restrictions of the Factories 
Act were extended to bleaching and dyeing works ; author- 
ity was given to provide analysts of food and drink, to 
be paid out of local rates ; there was an Act providing for 
inspection of gas-works, as well as for fixing quality of gas 
and limiting price ; there was the Act which, in addition to 
further mine-inspection, made it penal to employ boys under 
twelve not attending school and unable to read and write. 
In 1861 occurred an extension of the compulsory provisions 
of the Factories Act to lace- works ; power was given to poor- 

THE NEW TORYISM. 

11 

law guardians, &c, to enforce vaccination ; local boards were 
authorized to fix rates of hire for horses, ponies, mules, asses, 
and boats ; and certain locally-formed bodies had given to 
them powers of taxing the locality for rural drainage and 
irrigation works, and for supplying water to cattle. In 
1862 an Act was passed for restricting the employment of 
women and children in open-air bleaching ; and an Act for 
making illegal a coal-mine with a single shaft, or with shafts 
separated by less than a specified 6pace ; as well as an Act 
giving the Council of Medical Education the exclusive right 
to publish a Pharmacopoeia, the price of which is to be fixed 
by the Treasury. In 1863 came the extension of compulsory 
vaccination to Scotland, and also to Ireland ; there came the 
empowering of certain boards to borrow money repayable 
from the local rates, to employ and pay those out of work ; 
there came the authorizing of town-authorities to take posses- 
sion of neglected ornamental spaces, and rate the inhabitants 
for their support ; there came the Bakehouses Regulation 
Act, which, besides specifying minimum age of employes 
occupied between certain hours, prescribed periodical lime- 
washing, three coats of paint when painted, and cleaning with 
hot water and soap at least once in six months ; and there 
came also an Act giving a magistrate authority to decide on 
the wholesomeness or unwholesomeness of food brought be- 
fore him by an inspector. Of compulsory legislation dating 
from 1864, may be named an extension of the Factories Act 
to various additional trades, including regulations for cleans- 
ing and ventilation, and specifying of certain employes in 
match-works, that they might not take meals on the premises 
except in the wood-cutting places. Also there were passed a 
Chimney-Sweepers Act, an Act for further regulating the 
sale of beer in Ireland, an Act for compulsory testing of cables 
and anchors, an Act extending the Public Works Act of 1863, 
and the Contagious Diseases Act : which last gave the police, 
in specified places, powers which, in respect of certain classes 
of women, abolished sundry of those safeguards to individual 

12 

THE MAN VEESUS THE STATE. 

freedom established in past times. The year 1865 witnessed 
further provision for the reception and temporary relief of 
wanderers at the cost of ratepayers ; another public-house 
closing Act ; and an Act making compulsory regulations for 
extinguishing fires in London. Then, under the Ministry of 
Lord John Russell, in 1866, have to be named an Act to 
regulate cattle-sheds, &c, in Scotland, giving local authorities 
powers to inspect sanitary conditions and fix the numbers of 
cattle; an Act forcing hop-growers to label their bags with 
the year and place of growth and the true weight, and giving 
police powers of search ; an Act to facilitate the building of 
lodging-houses in Ireland, and providing for regulation of the 
inmates ; a Public Health Act, under which there is registra- 
tion of lodging-houses and limitation of occupants, with 
inspection and directions for lime- washing, &c, and a Public 
Libraries Act, giving local powers by which a majority can 
tax a minority for their books. 

Passing now to the legislation under the first Ministry of 
Mr. Gladstone, we have, in 1869, the establishment of State- 
telegraphy, with the accompanying interdict on telegraphing 
through any other agency ; we have the empowering a Secre- 
tary of State to regulate hired conveyances in London ; we 
have further and more stringent regulations to prevent cattle- 
diseases from spreading, another Beerhouse Regulation Act, 
and a Sea-birds Preservation Act (ensuring greater mortality 
of fish). In 1870 we have a law authorizing the Board of 
Public Works to make advances for landlords' improvements 
and for purchase by tenants ; we have the Act which enables 
the Education Department to form school-boards which shall 
purchase sites for schools, and may provide free schools 
supported by local rates, and enabling school-boards to pay a 
child's fees, to compel parents to send their children, &c, &c. ; 
we have a further Factories and "Workshops Act, making, 
among other restrictions, some on the employment of women 
and children in fruit-preserving and fish-curing works. In 
1871 we met with an amended Merchant Shipping Act, 

THE NEW TOEYISM. 

13 

directing officers of the Board of Trade to record the draught 
of sea-going vessels leaving port ; there is another Factory 
and Workshops Act, making further restrictions ; there is a 
Pedlars Act, inflicting penalties for hawking without a 
certificate, and limiting the district within which the certi- 
ficate holds as well as giving the police power to search 
pedlars' packs ; and there are further measures for enforcing 
vaccination. The year 1872 had, among other Acts, one 
which makes it illegal to take for hire more than one child 
to nurse, unless in a house registered by the authorities, who 
prescribe the number of infants to be received ; it had a 
Licensing Act, interdicting 6ale of spirits to those apparently 
under sixteen ; and it had another Merchant Shipping Act, 
establishing an annual survey of passenger steamers. Then 
in 1873 was passed the Agricultural Children's Act, which 
makes it penal for a farmer to employ a child who has 
neither certificate of elementary education nor of certain 
prescribed school-attendances ; and there was passed a 
Merchant Shipping Act, requiring on each vessel a scale 
showing draught and giving the Board of Trade power to fix 
the numbers of boats and life-saving appliances to be carried. 

Turn now to Liberal law-making under the present Minis- 
try. We have, in 1880, a law which forbids conditional ad- 
vance-notes in payment of sailors' wages ; also a law which 
dictates certain arrangements for the safe carriage of grain- 
cargoes ; also a law increasing local coercion over parents to 
send their children to school. In 1881 comes legislation to 
prevent trawling over clam-beds and bait-beds, and an interdict 
making it impossible to buy a glass of beer on Sunday in Wales. 
In 1882 the Board of Trade was authorized to grant licences 
to generate and sell electricity, and municipal bodies were en- 
abled to levy rates for electric-lighting: further exactions 
from ratepayers were authorized for facilitating more acces- 
sible baths and washhouses ; and local authorities were em- 
powered to make bye-laws for securing the decent lodging 
of persons engaged in picking fruit and vegetables. Of such 

14 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

legislation during 1883 may be named the Cheap Trains Act, 
which, partly by taxing the nation to the extent of £400,000 
a year (in the shape of relinquished passenger duty), and 
partly at the cost of railway-proprietors, still further cheapens 
travelling for workmen : the Board of Trade, through the 
Railway Commissioners, being empowered to ensure suffi- 
ciently good and frequent accommodation. Again, there is 
the Act which, under penalty of £10 for disobedience, forbids 
the payment of wages to workmen at or within public-houses ; 
there is another Factory and Workshops Act, commanding 
inspection of white lead works (to see that there are pro- 
vided overalls, respirators, baths, acidulated drinks, &c.) and 
of bakehouses, regulating times of employment in both, and 
prescribing in detail some constructions for the last, which 
are to be kept in a condition satisfactory to the inspectors. 

But we are far from forming an adequate conception if we 
look only at the compulsory legislation which has actually 
been established of late years. "We must look also at that 
which is advocated, and which threatens to be far more 
sweeping in range and stringent in character. "We have 
lately had a Cabinet Minister, one of the most advanced 
Liberals, so-called, who pooh-poohs the plans of the late 
Government for improving industrial dwellings as 60 much 
" tinkering ; " and contends for effectual coercion to be exer- 
cised over owners of small houses, over land-owners, and 
over ratepayers. Here is another Cabinet Minister who, 
addressing his constituents, speaks slightingly of the doings 
of philanthropic societies and religious bodies to help the 
poor, and says that " the whole of the people of this country 
ought to look upon this work as being their own work : " 
that is to say, some extensive Government measure is called 
for. Again, we have a Radical member of Parliament who 
leads a large and powerful body, aiming with annually-in- 
creasing promise of success, to enforce sobriety by giving to 
local majorities powers to prevent freedom of exchange in 
respect of certain commodities. Regulation of the hours of 

THE NEW TOEYISM. 

15 

labour for certain classes, which has been made more and 
more general by successive extensions of the Factories Acts, 
is likely now to be made still more general : a measure is to 
be proposed bringing the employes in all shops under such 
regulation. There is a rising demand, too, that education 
shall be made gratis (i. e., tax-supported), for all. The pay- 
ment of school-fees is beginning to be denounced as a wrong : 
the State must take the whole burden. Moreover, it is pro- 
posed by many that the State, regarded as an undoubtedly 
competent judge of what constitutes good education for the 
poor, shall undertake also to prescribe good education for the 
middle classes — shall stamp the children of these, too, after 
a State pattern, concerning the goodness of which they have 
no more doubt than the Chinese had when they fixed theirs. 
Then there is the " endowment of research," of late energeti- 
cally urged. Already the Government gives every year the 
sum of £4,000 for this purpose, to be distributed through the 
Royal Society ; and, in the absence of those who have strong 
motives for resisting the pressure of the interested, backed by 
those they easily persuade, it may by-and-by establish that 
paid " priesthood of science " long ago advocated by Sir 
David Brewster. Once more, plausible proposals are made 
that there should be organized a system of compulsory in- 
surance, by which men during their early lives shall be 
forced to provide for the time when they will be incapaci- 
tated. 

Nor does enumeration of these further measures of coercive 
rule, looming on us near at hand or in the distance, complete 
the account. Nothing more than cursory allusion has yet 
been made to that accompanying compulsion which takes the 
form of increased taxation, general and local. Partly for 
defraying the costs of carrying out these ever-multiplying 
sets of regulations, each of which requires an additional staff 
of officers, and partly to meet the outlay for new public insti- 
tutions, such as board-schools, free libraries, public museums, 
baths and washhouses, recreation grounds, &c, &c, local rates 

16 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

are year after year increased ; as the general taxation is 
increased by grants for education and to the departments of 
science and art, &c. Every one of these involves further 
coercion — restricts still more the freedom of the citizen. For 
the implied address accompanying every additional exaction 
is — " Hitherto you have been free to spend this portion of 
your earnings in any way which pleased you ; hereafter you 
shall not be free so to spend it, but we will spend it for the 
general benefit." Thus, either directly or indirectly, and in 
most cases both at once, the citizen is at each further stage 
in the growth of this compulsory legislation, deprived of 
some liberty which he previously had. 

Such, then, are the doings of the party which claims the 
name of Liberal ; and which calls itself Liberal as being the 
advocate of extended freedom ! 

I doubt not that many a member of the party has read the 
preceding section with impatience : wanting, as he does, to 
point out an immense oversight which he thinks destroys the 
validity of the argument. " You forget," he wishes to say, 
" the fundamental difference between the power which, in the 
past, established those restraints that Liberalism abolished, 
and the power which, in the present, establishes the restraints 
you call anti-Liberal. You forget that the one was an irre- 
sponsible power, while the other is a responsible power. You 
forget that if by the recent legislation of Liberals, people are 
variously regulated, the body which regulates them is of their 
own creating, and has their warrant for its acts." 

My answer is, that I have not forgotten this difference, 
but am prepared to contend that the difference is in large 
measure irrelevant to the issue. 

In the first place, the real issue is whether the lives of 
citizens are more interfered with than they were ; not the 
nature of the agency which interferes with them. Take a 
simpler case. A member of a trades' union has joined others 
in establishing an organization of a purely representative 

THE NEW TORYISM. 

17 

character. By it he is compelled to strike if a majority so 
decide ; he is forbidden to accept work save under the con- 
ditions they dictate ; he is prevented from profiting by his 
superior ability or energy to the extent he might do were it 
not for their interdict. He cannot disobey without abandon- 
ing those pecuniary benefits of the organization for which he 
has subscribed, and bringing on himself the persecution, and 
perhaps violence, of his fellows. Is he any the less coerced 
because the body coercing him is one which he had an equal 
voice with the rest in forming ? 

In the second place, if it be objected that the analogy is 
faulty, since the governing body of a nation, to which, as 
protector of the national life and interests, all must submit 
under penalty of social disorganization, has a far higher au- 
thority over citizens than the government of any private 
organization can have over its members ; then the reply is 
that, granting the difference, the answer made continues 
valid. If men use their liberty in such a way as to surrender 
their liberty, are they thereafter any the less slaves ? If 
people by a plebiscite elect a man despot over them, do they 
remain free because the despotism was of their own making ? 
Are the coercive edicts issued by him to be regarded as 
legitimate because they are the ultimate outcome of their 
own votes? As well might it be argued that the East 
African, who breaks a spear in another's presence that he 
may so become bondsman to him, still retains his liberty 
because he freely chose his master. 

Finally if any, not without marks of irritation as I can 
imagine, repudiate this reasoning, and say that there is no 
true parallelism between the relation of people to govern- 
ment where an irresponsible single ruler has been perma- 
nently elected, and the relation where a responsible repre- 
sentative body is maintained, and from time to time re- 
elected ; then there comes the ultimate reply — an altogether 
heterodox reply — by which most will be greatly astonished. 
This reply is, that these multitudinous restraining acts are 

IS 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

not defensible on the ground that they proceed from a popu- 
larly-chosen body; for that the authority of a popularly- 
chosen body is no more to be regarded as an unlimited au- 
thority than the authority of a monarch ; and that as true 
Liberalism in the past disputed the assumption of a mon- 
arch's unlimited authority, so true Liberalism in the present 
will dispute the assumption of unlimited parliamentary au- 
thority. Of this, however, more anon. Here I merely in- 
dicate it as an ultimate answer. 

Meanwhile it suffices to point out that until recently, just 
as of old, true Liberalism was shown by its acts to be moving 
ing towards the theory of a limited parliamentary authority. 
All these abolitions of restraints over religious beliefs and 
observances, over exchange and transit, over trade-combina- 
tions and the travelling of artisans, over the publication of 
opinions, theological or political, &c, &c, were tacit asser- 
tions of the desirableness of limitation. In the same way 
that the abandonment of sumptuary laws, of laws forbidding 
this or that kind of amusement, of laws dictating modes of 
farming, and many others of like meddling nature, which 
took place in early days, was an implied admission that the 
State ought not to interfere in such matters ; so those re- 
movals of hindrances to individual activities of one or other 
kind, which the Liberalism of the last generation effected, 
were practical confessions that in these directions, too, the 
sphere of governmental action should be narrowed. And 
this recognition of the propriety of restricting governmental 
action was a preparation for restricting it in theory. One of 
the most familiar political truths is that, in the course of 
social evolution, usage precedes law ; and that when usage 
has been well established it becomes law by receiving authori- 
tative endorsement and defined form. Manifestly then, 
Liberalism in the past, by its practice of limitation, was pre- 
paring the way for the principle of limitation. 

But returning from these more general considerations to 
the special question, I emphasize the reply that the liberty 

THE NEW TORYISM. 

19 

which a citizen enjoys is to be measured, not by the nature of 
the governmental machinery he lives under, whether repre- 
sentative or other, but by the relative paucity of the restraints 
it imposes on him ; and that, whether this machinery is or is 
not one he shared in making, its actions are not of the kind 
proper to Liberalism if they increase such restraints beyond 
those which are needful for preventing him from directly or 
indirectly aggressing on his fellows — needful, that is, for 
maintaining the liberties of his fellows against his invasions 
of them : restraints which are, theref ore, to be distinguished 
as negatively coercive, not positively coercive. 

Probably, however, the Liberal, and still more the sub- 
species Eadical, who more than any other in these latter 
days seems under the impression that so long as he has a 
good end in view he is warranted in exercising over men all 
the coercion he is able, will continue to protest. Knowing 
that his aim is popular benefit of some kind, to be achieved 
in some way, and believing that the Tory is, contrariwise, 
prompted by class-interest and the desire to maintain class- 
power, he will regard it as palpably absurd to group him as 
one of the same genus, and will scorn the reasoning used to 
prove that he belongs to it. 

Perhaps an analogy will help him to see its validity. If, 
away in the far East, where personal government is the only 
form of government known, he heard from the inhabitants 
an account of a struggle by which they had deposed a cruel 
and vicious despot, and put in his place one whose acts proved 
his desire for their welfare — if, after listening to their self- 
gratulations, he told them that they had not essentially 
changed the nature of their government, he would greatly 
astonish them; and probably he would have difficulty in 
making them understand that the substitution of a benevo- 
lent despot for a malevolent despot, still left the government 
a despotism. Similarly with Toryism as rightly conceived. 
Standing as it does for coercion by the State versus the 

20 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

freedom of the individual, Toryism remains Toryism, whether 
it extends this coercion for selfish or unselfish reasons. As 
certainly as the despot is still a despot, whether his motives 
for arbitrary rule are good or bad ; 60 certainly is the Tory 
still a Tory, whether he has egoistic or altruistic motives for 
using State-power to restrict the Liberty of the citizen, beyond 
the degree required for maintaining the liberties of other 
citizens. The altruistic Tory as well as the egoistic Tory 
belongs to the genus Tory ; though he forms a new species 
of the genus. And both stand in distinct contrast with the 
Liberal as defined in the days when Liberals were rightly so 
called, and when the definition was — "one who advocates 
greater freedom from restraint, especially in political institu- 
tions." 

Thus, then, is justified the paradox I set out with. As we 
have seen, Toryism and Liberalism originally emerged, the 
one from militancy and the other from industrialism. The 
one stood for the regime of status and the other for the 
regime of contract — the one for that system of compulsory 
co-operation which accompanies the legal inequality of classes, 
and the other for that voluntary co-operation which accom- 
panies their legal equality ; and beyond all question the early 
acts of the two parties were respectively for the maintenance 
of agencies which effect this compulsory co-operation, and 
for the weakening or curbing of them. Manifestly the im- 
plication is that, in so far as it has been extending the system 
of compulsion, what is now called Liberalism is a new form 
of Toryism. 

How truly this is so, we shall see still more clearly on 
looking at the facts the other side upwards, which we will 
presently do. 

Xote. — By sundry newspapers which noticed this article 
when it was originally published, the meaning of the above 
paragraphs was supposed to be that Liberals and Tories have 

THE NEW TORYISM. 

21 

changed places. This, however, is by no means the implica- 
tion. A new species of Tory may arise without disappear- 
ance of the original species. When saying, as on page 289, 
that in our days " Conservatives and Liberals vie with one 
another in multiplying " interferences, I clearly implied the 
belief that while Liberals have taken to coercive legislation, 
Conservatives have not abandoned it. Nevertheless, it is 
true that the laws made by Liberals are so greatly increasing 
the compulsions and restraints exercised over citizens, that 
among Conservatives who suffer from this aggressiveness 
there is growing up a tendency to resist it. Proof is fur- 
nished by the fact that the " Liberty and Property Defense 
League," largely consisting of Conservatives, has taken for 
its motto " Individualism versus Socialism." So that if the 
present drift of things continues, it may by and by really 
happen that the Tories will be defenders of liberties which 
the Liberals, in pursuit of what they think popular welfare, 
trample under foot. 

THE COMING SLAVERY. 

The kinship of pity to love is shown among other ways 
in this, that it idealizes its object. Sympathy with one in 
suffering suppresses, for the time being, remembrance of 
his transgressions. The feeling which vents itself in " poor 
fellow ! " on seeing one in agony, excludes the thought of 
" bad fellow," which might at another time arise. Naturally, 
then, if the wretched are unknown or but vaguely known, 
all the demerits they may have are ignored ; and thus it hap- 
pens that when the miseries of the poor are dilated upon, 
they are thought of as the miseries of the deserving poor, 
instead of being thought of as the miseries of the undeserv- 
ing poor, which in large measure they should be. Those 
whose hardships are set forth in pamphlets and proclaimed 
in sermons and speeches which echo throughout society, are 
assumed to be all worthy souls, grievously wronged ; and 
none of them are thought of as bearing the penalties of their 
misdeeds. 

On hailing a cab in a London street, it is surprising how 
frequently the door is officiously opened by one who expects 
to get something for his trouble. The surprise lessens after 
counting the many loungers about tavern-doors, or after ob- 
serving the quickness with which a street-performance, or 
procession, draws from neighbouring slums and stable-yards 
a group of idlers. Seeing how numerous they are in every 
small area, it becomes manifest that tens of thousands of 
such swarm through London. " They have no work," you 

THE COMING SLAVEET. 

23 

say. Say rather that they either refuse work or quickly turn 
themselves out of it. They are simply good-for-nothings, 
who in one way or other live on the good-for-somethings — 
vagrants and sots, criminals and those on the way to crime, 
youths who are burdens on hard-worked parents, men who 
appropriate the wages of their wives, fellows who share the 
gains of prostitutes ; and then, less visible and less numerous, 
there is a corresponding class of women. 

Is it natural that happiness should be the lot of such ? or 
is it natural that they should bring unhappiness on them- 
selves and those connected with them ? Is it not manifest 
that there must exist in our midst an immense amount of 
misery which is a normal result of misconduct, and ought not 
to be dissociated from it ? There is a notion, always more 
or less prevalent and just now vociferously expressed, that 
all social suffering is removable, and that it is the duty of 
somebody or other to remove it. Both these beliefs are false. 
To separate pain from ill-doing is to fight against the consti- 
tution of things, and will be followed by far more pain. 
Saving men from the natural penalties of dissolute living, 
eventually necessitates the infliction of artificial penalties in 
solitary cells, on tread-wheels, and by the lash. I suppose a 
dictum on which the current creed and the creed of science 
are at one, may be considered to have as high an authority 
as can be found. "Well, the command "if any would not 
work neither should he eat," is simply a Christian enuncia- 
tion of that universal law of Nature under which life has 
reached its present height — the law that a creature not ener- 
getic enough to maintain itself must die : the sole difference 
being that the law which in the one case is to be artificially 
enforced, is, in the other natural necessity. And yet 

this particular tenet of their religion which science so mani- 
festly justifies, is the one which Christians seem least in- 
clined to accept. The current assumption is that there should 
be no suffering, and that society is to blame for that which 
exists. 

24 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

"But surely we are not without responsibilities, even 
when the suffering is that of the unworthy ? " 

If the meaning of the word " we " be 60 expanded as to 
include with ourselves our ancestors, and especially our an- 
cestral legislators, I agree. I admit that those who made, 
and modified, and administered, the old Poor Law, were re- 
sponsible for producing an appalling amount of demoraliza- 
tion, which it will take more than one generation to remove. 
I admit, too, the partial responsibility of recent and present 
law-makers for regulations which have brought into being a 
permanent body of tramps, who ramble from union to union ; 
and also their responsibility for maintaining a constant sup- 
ply of felons by sending back convicts into society under 
such conditions that they are almost compelled again to com- 
mit crimes. Moreover, I admit that the philanthropic are 
not without their share of responsibility ; since, that they 
may aid the offspring of the unworthy, they disadvantage the 
offspring of the worthy through burdening their parents by 
increased local rates. Nay, I even admit that these swarms 
of good-for-nothings, fostered and multiplied by public and 
private agencies, have, by sundry mischievous meddlings, been 
made to suffer more than they would otherwise have suffered. 
Are these the responsibilities meant ? I suspect not. 

But now, leaving the question of responsibilities, however 
conceived, and considering only the evil itself, what shall we 
say of its treatment ? Let me begin with a fact. 

A late uncle of mine, the Rev. Thomas Spencer, for some 
twenty years incumbent of Hinton Charterhouse, near Bath, 
no sooner entered on his parish duties than he proved him- 
self anxious for the welfare of the poor, by establishing a 
school, a library, a clothing club, and land-allotments, besides 
building some model cottages. Moreover, up to 1833 h© 
was a pauper's friend — always for the pauper against the 
overseer. 

There presently came, however, the debates on the Poor 

THE COMING SLAVERY. 

25 

Law, which impressed him with the evils of the system then 
in force. Though an ardent philanthropist he was not a 
timid sentimentalist. The result was that, immediately the 
New Poor Law was passed, he proceeded to carry out its 
provisions in his parish. Almost universal opposition was 
encountered by him : not the poor only being his opponents, 
but even the farmers on whom came the burden of heavy 
poor-rates. For, strange to say, their interests had become 
apparently identified with the maintenance of this system 
which taxed them so largely. The explanation is that there 
had grown up the practice of paying out of the rates a part 
of the wages of each farm-servant — " make-wages," as the 
sum was called. And though the farmers contributed most 
of the fund from which " make-wages " were paid, yet, since 
all other ratepayers contributed, the farmers seemed to gain 
by the arrangement. My uncle, however, not easily deterred, 
faced all this opposition and enforced the law. The result 
was that in two years the rates were reduced from £700 a 
year to £200 a year ; while the condition of the parish was 
greatly improved. " Those who had hitherto loitered at the 
corners of the streets, or at the doors of the beer-shops, had 
something else to do, and one after another they obtained 
employment ; " so that out of a population of 800, only 15 
had to be sent as incapable paupers to the Bath Union (when 
that was formed), in place of the 100 who received out-door 
relief a short time before. If it be said that the £25 tele- 
scope which, a few years after, his parishioners presented to 
my uncle, marked the gratitude of the ratepayers only ; then 
my reply is the fact that when, some years later still, having 
killed himself by overwork in pursuit of popular welfare, he 
was taken to Hinton to be buried, the procession which fol- 
lowed him to the grave included not the well-to-do only but 
the poor. 

Several motives have prompted this brief narrative. One 
is the wish to prove that sympathy with the people and self- 
sacrificing efforts on their behalf, do not necessarily imply 

26 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

approval of gratuitous aids. Another is the desire to show 
that benefit may result, not from multiplication of artificial 
appliances to mitigate distress, but, contrariwise, from dimi- 
nution of them. And a further purpose I have in view is 
that of preparing the way for an analogy. 

Under another form and in a different sphere, we are now 
yearly extending a system which is identical in nature with 
the system of " make- wages " under the old Poor Law. Lit- 
tle as politicians recognize the fact, it is nevertheless demon- 
strable that these various public appliances for working-class 
comfort, which they are supplying at the cost of ratepayers, 
are intrinsically of the same nature as those which, in past 
times, treated the farmer's man as half-labourer and half- 
pauper. In either case the worker receives in return for 
what he does, money wherewith to buy certain of the things 
he wants ; while, to procure the rest of them for him, money 
is furnished out of a common fund raised by taxes. What 
matters it whether the things supplied by ratepayers for 
nothing, instead of by the employer in payment, are of this 
kind or that kind ? the principle is the same. For sums 
received let us substitute the commodities and benefits pur- 
chased ; and then see how the matter stands. In old Poor- 
Law times, the farmer gave for work done the equivalent, 
say of house-rent, bread, clothes, and fire ; while the rate- 
payers practically supplied the man and his family with their 
6hoes, tea, sugar, candles, a little bacon, &c. The division is, 
of course, arbitrary ; but unquestionably the farmer and the 
ratepayers furnished these things between them. At the 
present time the artisan receives from his employer in wages, 
the equivalent of the consumable commodities he wants ; 
while from the public comes satisfaction for others of his 
needs and desires. At the cost of ratepayers he has in some 
cases, and will presently have in more, a house at less than 
its commercial value ; for of course when, as in Liverpool, a 
municipality spends nearly £200,000 in pulling down and 
reconstructing low-class dwellings, and is about to spend as 

THE COMING SLAVERY. 

27 

much again, the implication is that in some way the rate- 
payers supply the poor with more accommodation than the 
rents they pay would otherwise have brought. The artisan 
further receives from them, in schooling for Ins children, 
much more than he pays for ; and there is every probability 
that he will presently receive it from them gratis. The 
ratepayers also satisfy what desire he may have for books 
and newspapers, and comfortable places to read them in. In 
some cases too, as in Manchester, gymnasia for his children 
of both sexes, as well as recreation grounds, are provided. 
That is to say, he obtains from a fund raised by local taxes, 
certain benefits beyond those which the sum received for his 
labour enables him to purchase. The sole difference, then, 
between this system and the old system of " make- wages," is 
between the kinds of satisfactions obtained ; and this differ- 
ence does not in the least affect the nature of the arrange- 
ment. 

Moreover, the two are pervaded by substantially the same 
illusion. In the one case, as in the other, what looks like a 
gratis benefit is not a gratis benefit. The amount which, 
under the old Poor Law, the half-pauperized labourer re- 
ceived from the parish to eke out his weekly income, was not 
really, as it appeared, a bonus ; for it was accompanied by a 
substantially-equivalent decrease of his wages, as was quickly 
proved when the system was abolished and the wages rose. 
Just so is it with these seeming boons received by working 
people in towns. I do not refer only to the fact that they 
unawares pay in part through the raised rents of their dwell- 
ings (when they are not actual ratepayers) ; but I refer to 
the fact that the wages received by them are, like the wages 
of the farm-labourer, diminished by these public burdens 
f ailing on employers. Read the accounts coming of late from 
Lancashire concerning the cotton-strike, containing proofs, 
given by artisans themselves, that the margin of profit is so 
narrow that the less skilful manufacturers, as well as those 
with deficient capital, fail, and that the companies of co- 

28 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

operators who compete with them can rarely hold their own ; 
and then consider what is the implication respecting wages. 
Among the costs of production have to be reckoned taxes, 
general and local. If, as in our large towns, the local rates 
now amount to one-third of the rental or more — if the 
employer has to pay this, not on his private dwelling only, 
but on his business-premises, factories, warehouses, or the 
like ; it results that the interest on his capital must be dimin- 
ished by that amount, or the amount must be taken from 
the wages-fund, or partly one and partly the other. And if 
competition among capitalists in the same business, and in 
other businesses, has the effect of so keeping down interest 
that while some gain others lose, and not a few are ruined — 
if capital, not getting adequate interest, flows elsewhere and 
leaves labour unemployed ; then it is manifest that the 
choice for the artisan under such conditions, lies between 
diminished amount of work and diminished rate of payment 
for it. Moreover, for kindred reasons these local burdens 
raise the costs of the things he consumes. The charges made 
by distributors are, on the average, determined by the current 
rates of interest on capital used in distributing businesses ; 
and the extra costs of carrying on such businesses have to be 
paid for by extra prices. So that as in the past the rural 
worker lost in one way what he gained in another, so in the 
present does the urban worker : there being, too, in both 
cases, the loss entailed on him by the cost of administration 
and the waste accompanying it. 

"But what has all this to do with 'the coming slavery'?" 
will perhaps be asked. Nothing directly, but a good deal 
indirectly, as we shall see after yet another preliminary sec- 
tion. 

It is said that when railways were first opened in Spain, 
peasants standing on the tracks were not unfrequently run 
over ; and that the blame fell on the engine-drivers for not 
stopping: rural experiences having yielded no conception 

THE COMING SLAVERY. 

29 

of the momentum of a large mass moving at a high ve- 
locity. 

The incident is recalled to me on contemplating the ideas 
of the so-called " practical " politician, into whose mind there 
enters no thought of such a thing as political momentum, 
still less of a political momentum which, instead of diminish- 
ing or remaining constant, increases. The theory on which 
he daily proceeds is that the change caused by his measure 
will stop where he intends it to stop. He contemplates in- 
tently the things his act will achieve, but thinks little of 
the remoter issues of the movement his act sets up, and still 
less its collateral issues. When, in war-time, "food for 
powder" was to be provided by encouraging population — 
when Mr. Pitt said, " Let us make relief in cases where there 
are a number of children a matter of right and honour, in- 
stead of a ground for opprobrium and contempt ; " * it was 
not expected that the poor-rates would be quadrupled in fifty 
years, that women with many bastards would be preferred as 
wives to modest women, because of their incomes from the 
parish, and that hosts of ratepayers would be pulled down 
into the ranks of pauperism. Legislators who in 1833 voted 
£30,000 a year to aid in building school-houses, never sup- 
posed that the step they then took would lead to forced con- 
tributions, local and general, now amounting to £6,000,000 ; f 
they did not intend to establish the principle that A should 
be made responsible for educating B's offspring ; they did 
not dream of a compulsion which would deprive poor widows 
of the help of their elder children ; and still less did they 
dream that their successors, by requiring impoverished par- 
ents to apply to Boards of Guardians to pay the fees which 
School Boards would not remit, would initiate a habit of ap- 
plying to Boards of Guardians and so cause pauperization.^: 

* Hansard's Parliamentary History, 32, p. 710 

\ Since this was written the sum has risen to £10,000,000; i.e., in 1890. 
% Fortnightly Review, January, 1884, p. 17. 

30 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

Neither did those who in 1834 passed an Act regulating the 
labour of women and children in certain factories, imagine 
that the system they were beginning would end in the re 
striction and inspection of labour in all kinds of producing 
establishments where more than fifty people are employed ; 
nor did they conceive that the inspection provided would 
grow to the extent of requiring tbat before a " young per- 
son " is employed in a factory, authority must be given by 
a certifying surgeon, who, by personal examination (to which 
no limit is placed) has satisfied himself that there is no inca- 
pacitating disease or bodily infirmity: his verdict deter- 
mining whether the " young person " shall earn wages or 
not.* Even less, as I say, does the politician who plumes 
himself on the practicalness of his aims, conceive the indi- 
rect results which will follow the direct results of his meas- 
ures. Thus, to take a case connected with one named above, 
it was not intended through the system of " payment by re- 
sults," to do anything more than give teachers an efficient 
stimulus : it was not supposed that in numerous cases their 
health would give way under the stimulus ; it was not ex- 
pected that they would be led to adopt a cramming system 
and to put undue pressure on dull and weak children, often 
to their great injury ; it was not foreseen that in many cases 
a bodily enfeeblement would be caused which no amount of 
grammar and geography can compensate for.f The licensing 
of public-houses was simply for maintaining public order : 
those who devised it never imagined that there would result 
an organized interest powerfully influencing elections in an 
unwholesome way. Nor did it occur to the " practical " 
politicians who provided a compulsory load-line for merchant 
vessels, that the pressure of ship-owners' interests would 

* Factories and Workshops Act, 41 and 42 Vic, cap. 16. 

f Since this was written, these mischiefs have come to be recognized, 
and the system is in course of abandonment ; but not one word is said 
about the immense injury the Government has inflicted on millions of 
children during the last 20 years ! 

THE COMING SLAVEKY. 

31 

habitually cause the putting of the load-line at the very high- 
est limit, and that from precedent to precedent, tending ever 
in the same direction, the load-line would gradually rise in 
the better class of ships ; as from good authority I learn that 
it has already done. Legislators who, some forty years ago, 
by Act of Parliament compelled railway-companies to supply 
cheap locomotion, would have ridiculed the belief, had it 
been expressed, that eventually their Act would punish the 
companies which improved the supply ; and yet this was the 
result to companies which began to carry third-class passen- 
gers by fast trains ; since a penalty to the amount of the 
passenger-duty was inflicted on them for every third-class 
passenger so carried. To which instance concerning railways, 
add a far more striking one disclosed by comparing the rail- 
way policies of England and France. The law-makers who 
provided for the ultimate lapsing of French railways to the 
State, never conceived the possibility that inferior travelling 
facilities would result — did not foresee that reluctance to 
depreciate the value of property eventually coming to the 
State, would negative the authorization of competing lines, 
and that in the absence of competing lines locomotion would 
be relatively costly, slow, and infrequent ; for, as Sir Thomas 
Farrer has lately shown, the traveller in England has great 
advantages over the French traveller in the economy, swift- 
ness, and frequency with which his journeys can be made. 

But the " practical " politician who, in spite of such expe- 
riences repeated generation after generation, goes on thinking 
only of proximate results, naturally never thinks of results 
still more remote, still more general, and still more important 
than those just exemplified. To repeat the metaphor used 
above— he never asks whether the political momentum set 
up by his measure, in some cases decreasing but in other 
cases greatly increasing, will or will not have the same gen- 
eral direction with other like momenta ; and whether it may 
not join them in presently producing an aggregate energy 
working changes never thought of. Dwelling only on the 

32 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

effects of his particular stream of legislation, and not observ- 
ing how such other streams already existing, and still other 
streams which will follow his initiative, pursue the same 
average course, it never occurs to him that they may pres- 
ently unite into a voluminous flood utterly changing the face 
of things. Or to leave figures for a more literal statement, 
he is unconscious of the truth that he is helping to form a 
certain type of social organization, and that kindred meas- 
ures, effecting kindred changes of organization, tend with 
ever-increasing force to make that type general ; until, pass- 
ing a certain point, the proclivity towards it becomes irre- 
sistible. Just as each society aims when possible to produce 
in other societies a structure akin to its own — just as among 
the Greeks, the Spartans and the Athenians struggled to 
spread their respective political institutions, or as, at the 
time of the French Revolution, the European absolute mon- 
archies aimed to re-establish absolute monarchy in France 
while the Republic encouraged the formation of other re- 
publics ; so within every society, each species of structure 
tends to propagate itself. Just as the system of voluntary 
co-operation by companies, associations, unions, to achieve 
business ends and other ends, spreads throughout a com- 
munity ; so does the antagonistic system of compulsory co- 
operation under State-agencies spread ; and the larger be- 
comes its extension the more power of spreading it gets. 
The question of qxiestions for the politician should ever be — 
u "What type of social structure am I tending to produce ? " 
But this is a question he never entertains. 

Here we will entertain it for him. Let us now observe 
the general course of recent changes, with the accompanying 
current of ideas, and see whither they are carrying us. 

The blank form of an inquiry daily made is — " "We have 
already done this ; why should we not do that ? " And the 
regard for precedent suggested by it, is ever pushing on regu- 
lative legislation. Having had brought within their sphere 

THE COMING SLAYEET. 

33 

of operation more and more numerous businesses, the Acts 
restricting hours of employment and dictating the treatment 
of workers are now to be made applicable to shops. From 
inspecting lodging-houses to limit the numbers of occupants 
and enforce sanitary conditions, we have passed to inspecting 
all houses below a certain rent in which there are members 
of more than one family, and are now passing to a kindred 
inspection of all small houses.* The buying and working of 
telegraphs by the State is made a reason for urging that the 
State should buy and work the railways. Supplying children 
with food for their minds by public agency is being followed 
in some cases by supplying food for their bodies ; and after 
the practice has been made gradually more general, we may 
anticipate that the supply, now proposed to be made gratis in 
the one case, will eventually be proposed to be made gratis 
in the other : the argument that good bodies as well as good 
minds are needful to make good citizens, being logically 
urged as a reason for the extension.f And then, avowedly 
proceeding on the precedents furnished by the church, the 
school, and the reading-room, all publicly provided, it is con- 
tended that " pleasure, in the sense it is now generally ad- 
mitted, needs legislating for and organizing at least as much 
as work." \ 

Not precedent only prompts this spread, but also the 
necessity which arises for supplementing ineffective measures, 
and for dealing with the artificial evils continually caused. 
Failure does not destroy faith in the agencies employed, but 
merely suggests more stringent use of such agencies or wider 

* See letter of Local Government Board, Times, January 2, 1884. 

t Verification comes more promptly than I expected. This article has 
been standing in type since January 30, and in the interval, namely on 
March 13 [the article was published on April 1], the London School Board 
resolved to apply for authority to use local charitable funds for supplying 
gratis meals and clothing to indigent children. Presently the definition 
of " indigent " will be widened ; more children will be included, and more 
funds asked for. 

X Fortnightly Review, January, 1884, p. 21. 

34 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

ramifications of them. Laws to check intemperance, begin- 
ning in early times and coming down to our own times, not 
having done what was expected, there come demands for 
more thorough-going laws, locally preventing the sale alto- 
gether ; and here, as in America, these will doubtless be 
followed by demands that prevention shall be made universal. 
All the many appliances for " stamping out " epidemic dis- 
eases not having succeeded in preventing outbreaks of small- 
pox, fevers, and the like, a further remedy is applied for in 
the shape of police-power to search houses for diseased 
persons, and authority for medical officers to examine any 
one they think fit, to see whether he or she is suffering from 
an infectious or contagious malady. Habits of improvidence 
having for generations been cultivated by the Poor-Law, and 
the improvident enabled to multiply, the evils produced by 
compulsory charity are now proposed to be met by compul- 
sory insurance. 

The extension of this policy, causing extension of corre- 
sponding ideas, fosters everywhere the tacit assumption that 
Government should step in whenever anything is not going 
right. " Surely you would not have this misery continue ! " 
exclaims some one, if you hint a demurrer to much that is 
now being said and done. Observe what is implied by this 
exclamation. It takes for granted, first, that all suffering 
ought to be prevented, which is not true : much of the suffer- 
ing is curative, and prevention of it is prevention of a remedy. 
In the second place, it takes for granted that every evil can 
be removed : the truth being that, with the existing defects 
of human nature, many evils can only be thrust out of one 
place or form into another place or form — often being in- 
creased by the change. The exclamation also implies the 
unhesitating belief, here especially concerning us, that evils 
of all kinds should be dealt with by the State. There does 
not occur the inquiry whether there are at work other agen- 
cies capable of dealing with evils, and whether the evils in 
question may not be among those which are best dealt with 

THE COMING SLAVERY. 

35 

by these other agencies. And obviously, the more numerous 
governmental interventions become, the more confirmed does 
this habit of thought grow, and the more loud and perpetual 
the demands for intervention. 

Every extension of the regulative policy involves an addi- 
tion to the regulative agents — a further growth of officialism 
and an increasing power of the organization formed of 
officials. Take a pair of scales with many shot in the one 
and a few in the other. Lift shot after shot out of the loaded 
scale and put it into the unloaded scale. Presently you will 
produce a balance ; and if you go on, the position of the 
scales will be reversed. Suppose the beam to be unequally 
divided, and let the lightly loaded scale be at the end of a 
very long arm ; then the transfer of each shot, producing a 
much greater effect, will far sooner bring about a change of 
position. I use the figure to illustrate what results from 
transferring one individual after another from the regulated 
mass of the community to the regulating structures. The 
transfer weakens the one and strengthens the other in a far 
greater degree than is implied by the relative change of 
numbers. A comparatively small body of officials, coherent, 
having common interests, and acting under central authority, 
has an immense advantage over an incoherent public which 
has no settled policy, and can be brought to act unitedly 
only under strong provocation. Hence an organization of 
officials, once passing a certain stage of growth, becomes 
less and less resistible ; as we see in the bureaucracies of 
the Continent. 

Not only does the power of resistance of the regulated 
part decrease in a geometrical ratio as the regulating part 
increases, but the private interests of many in the regulated 
part itself, make the change of ratio still more rapid. In 
every circle conversations show that now, when the passing 
of competitive examinations renders them eligible for the 
public service, youths are being educated in such ways that 
they may pass them and get employment under Govermnent. 

36 

THE MAN 7EESUS THE STATE. 

One consequence is that men who might otherwise reprobate 
further growth of officialism, are led to look on it with 
tolerance, if not favourably, as offering possible careers for 
those dependent on them and those related to them. Any 
one who remembers the numbers of upper-class and middle- 
class families anxious to place their children, will see that no 
small encouragement to the spread of legislative control is 
now coming from those who, but for the personal interests 
thus arising, would be hostile to it. 

This pressing desire for careers is enforced by the pref- 
erence for careers which are thought respectable. " Even 
should his salary be small, his occupation will be that of a 
gentleman," thinks the father, who wants to get a Govern- 
ment-clerkship for his son. And this relative dignity of 
State-servants as compared with those occupied in business 
increases as the administrative organization becomes a larger 
and more powerful element in society, and tends more and 
more to fix the standard of honour. The prevalent ambition 
with a young Frenchman is to get some small official post 
in his locality, to rise thence to a place in the local centre of 
government, and finally to reach some head-office in Paris. 
And in Russia, where that universality of State-regulation 
which characterizes the militant type of society has been 
carried furthest, we see this ambition pushed to its extreme. 
Says Mr. "Wallace, quoting a passage from a play: — "All 
men, even shopkeepers and cobblers, aim at becoming officers, 
and the man who has passed his whole life without official 
rank seems to be not a human being." * 

These various influences working from above downwards, 
meet with an increasing response of expectations and solici- 
tations proceeding from below upwards. The hard-worked 
and over-burdened who form the great majority, and still 
more the incapables perpetually helped who are ever led to 
look for more help, are ready supporters of schemes which 

* Bussia, i, 422. 

THE COMING SLAVERY. 

37 

promise them this or the other benefit by State-agency, and 
ready believers of those who tell them that such benefits can 
be given, and ought to be given. They listen with eager 
faith to all builders of political air-castles, from Oxford 
graduates down to Irish irreconcilables ; and every addi- 
tional tax-supported appliance for their welfare raises hopes 
of further ones. Indeed the more numerous public instru- 
mentalities become, the more is there generated in citizens 
the notion that everything is to be done for them, and 
nothing by them. Each generation is made less familiar 
with the attainment of desired ends by individual actions or 
private combinations, and more familiar with the attainment 
of them by governmental agencies ; until, eventually, govern- 
mental agencies come to be thought of as the only available 
agencies. This result was well shown in the recent Trades- 
Unions Congress at Paris. The English delegates, report- 
ing to their constituents, said that between themselves and 
their foreign colleagues " the point of difference was the 
extent to which the State should be asked to protect labour ; " 
reference being thus made to the fact, conspicuous in the 
reports of the proceedings, that the French delegates always 
invoked governmental power as the only means of satisfying 
their wishes. 

The diffusion of education has worked, and will work 
still more, in the same direction. " "We must educate our 
masters," is the well-known saying of a Liberal who opposed 
the last extension of the franchise. Yes, if the education 
were worthy to be so called, and were relevant to the politi- 
cal enlightenment needed, much might be hoped from it. 
But knowing rules of syntax, being able to add up correctly, 
having geographical information, and a memory stocked with 
the dates of kings' accessions and generals' victories, no more 
implies fitness to form political conclusions than acquirement 
of skill in drawing implies expertness in telegraphing, or 
than ability to play cricket implies proficiency on the violin. 
" Surely," rejoins some one, " facility in reading opens the 

38 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

way to political knowledge." Doubtless ; but will the way 
be followed ? Table-talk proves that nine out of ten people 
read what amuses them rather than what instructs them ; and 
proves, also, that the last thing they read is something which 
tells them disagreeable truths or dispels groundless hopes. 
That popular education results in an extensive reading of 
publications which foster pleasant illusions rather than of 
those which insist on hard realities, is beyond question. Says 
" A Mechanic," writing in the Pall Mall Gazette of Decem- 
ber 3, 1883 :— 

' ' Improved education instils the desire for culture — culture instils 
the desire for many things as yet quite beyond working men's reach 
.... in the furious competition to which the present age is given up 
they are utterly impossible to the poorer classes ; hence they are dis- 
contented with things as they are, and the more educated the more 
discontented. Hence, too, Mr. Ruskin and Mr. Morris are regarded as 
true prophets by many of us." 

And that the connexion of cause and effect here alleged is a 
real one, we may see clearly enough in the present state of 
Germany. 

Being possessed of electoral power, as are now the mass 
of those who are thus led to nurture sanguine anticipations 
of benefits to be obtained by social reorganization, it results 
that whoever seeks their votes must at least refrain from ex- 
posing their mistaken beliefs ; even if he does not yield to 
the temptation to express agreement with them. Every can- 
didate for Parliament is prompted to propose or support some 
new piece of ad captandum legislation. Nay, even the chiefs 
of parties — these anxious to retain office and those to wrest it 
from them — severally aim to get adherents by outbidding one 
another. Each seeks popularity by promising more than his 
opponent has promised, as we have lately seen. And then, 
as divisions in Parliament show us, the traditional loyalty to 
leaders overrides questions concerning the intrinsic propriety 
of proposed measures. Representatives are unconscientious 
enough to vote for Bills which they believe to be wrong in 

THE COMING SLAVERY. 

39 

principle, because party-needs and regard for the next elec- 
tion demand it. And thus a vicious policy is strengthened 
even by those who see its viciousness. 

Meanwhile there goes on out-of-doors an active propa- 
ganda to which all these influences are ancillary. Commu- 
nistic theories, partially indorsed by one Act of Parliament 
after another, and tacitly if not avowedly favoured by nu- 
merous public men seeking supporters, are being advocated 
more and more vociferously by popular leaders, and urged 
on by organized societies. There is the movement for land- 
nationalization which, aiming at a system of land-tenure 
equitable in the abstract, is, as all the world knows, pressed 
by Mr. George and his friends with avowed disregard for 
the just claims of existing owners, and as the basis of a 
scheme going more than half-way to State-socialism. And 
then there is the thorough-going Democratic Federation of 
Mr. Hyndman and his adherents. We are told by them that 
" the handful of marauders who now hold possession [of the 
land] have and can have no right save brute force against the 
tens of millions whom they wrong." They exclaim against 
" the shareholders who have been allowed to lay hands 
upon (!) our great railway communications." They condemn 
" above all, the active capitalist class, the loan-mongers, the 
farmers, the mine exploiters, the contractors, the middle- 
men, the factory-lords — these, the modern slave drivers" 
who exact "more and yet more surplus value out of the 
wage-slaves whom they employ." And they think it " high 
time " that trade should be " removed from the control of 
individual greed." * 

It remains to point out that the tendencies thus variously 
displayed, are being strengthened by press advocacy, daily 
more pronounced. Journalists, always chary of saying that 
which is distasteful to their readers, are some of them going 
with the stream and adding to its force. Legislative med- 

Socialism made Plain. Reeves, 185, Fleet Street. 

40 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

dlings which they would once have condemned they now 
pass in silence, if they do not advocate them ; and they speak 
of laissez-faire as an exploded doctrine. " People are no 
longer frightened at the thought of socialism," is the state- 
ment which meets us one day. On another day, a town 
which does not adopt the Free Libraries Act is sneered at 
as being alarmed by a measure so moderately communistic. 
And then, along with editorial assertions that this economic 
evolution is coming and must be accepted, there is promi- 
nence given to the contributions of its advocates. Mean- 
while those who regard the recent course of legislation as 
disastrous, and see that its future course is likely to be still 
more disastrous, are being reduced to silence by the belief 
that it is useless to reason with people in a state of political 
intoxication. 

See, then, the many concurrent causes which threaten 
continually to accelerate the transformation now going on. 
There is that spread of regulation caused by following prec- 
edents, which become the more authoritative the further the 
policy is carried. There is that increasing need for adminis- 
trative compulsions and restraints, which results from the 
unforeseen evils and shortcomings of preceding compulsions 
and restraints. Moreover, every additional State-interfer- 
ence strengthens the tacit assumption that it is the duty of 
the State to deal with all evils and secure all benefits. In- 
creasing power of a growing administrative organization is 
accompanied by decreasing power of the rest of the society 
to resist its further growth and control. The multiplication 
of careers opened by a developing bureaucracy, tempts mem- 
bers of the classes regulated by it to favour its extension, as 
adding to the chances of safe and respectable places for their 
relatives. The people at large, led to look on benefits re- 
ceived through public agencies as gratis benefits, have their 
hopes continually excited by the prospects of more. A 
spreading education, furthering the diffusion of pleasing 
errors rather than of stern truths, renders such hopes both 

THE COMING SLAVEET. 

41 

stronger and more general. "Worse still, such hopes are 
ministered to by candidates for public choice, to augment 
their chances of success ; and leading statesmen, in pursuit of 
party ends, bid for popular favour by countenancing them. 
Getting repeated justifications from new laws harmonizing 
with their doctrines, political enthusiasts and unwise philam 
thropists push their agitations with growing confidence and 
success. Journalism, ever responsive to popular opinion, 
daily strengthens it by giving it voice ; while counter-opinion, 
more and more discouraged, finds little utterance. 

Thus influences of various kinds conspire to increase 
corporate action and decrease individual action. And the 
change is being on all sides aided by schemers, each of whom 
thinks only of his pet plan and not at all of the general re- 
organization which his plan, joined with others such, are work- 
ing out. It is said that the French Revolution devoured its 
own children. Here, an analogous castastrophe seems not 
unlikely. The numerous socialistic changes made by Act of 
Parliament, joined with the numerous others presently to be 
made, will by-and-by be all merged in State-socialism — 
swallowed in the vast wave which they have little by little 
raised. 

"But why is this change described as 'the coming 
slavery' ?" is a question which many will still ask. The 
reply is simple. All socialism involves slavery. 

What is essential to the idea of a slave ? We primarily 
think of him as one who is owned by another. To be more 
than nominal, however, the ownership must be shown by 
control of the slave's actions — a control which is habitually 
for the benefit of the controller. That which fundamentally 
distinguishes the slave is that he labours under coercion to 
satisfy another's desires. The relation admits of sundry 
gradations. Remembering that originally the slave is a 
prisoner whose life is at the mercy of his captor, it suffices 
here to note that there is a harsh form of slavery in which, 

42 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

treated as an animal, lie has to expend his entire effort for his 
owner's advantage. Under a system less harsh, though 
occupied chiefly in working for his owner, he is allowed a 
short time in which to work for himself, and some ground 
on which to grow extra food. A further amelioration gives 
him power to sell the produce of his plot and keep the pro- 
ceeds. Then we come to the still more moderated form 
which commonly arises where, having been a free man work- 
ing on his own land, conquest turns him into what we dis- 
tinguish as a serf ; and he has to give to his owner each year 
a fixed amount of labour or produce, or both : retaining the 
rest himself. Finally, in some cases, as in Russia before 
serfdom was abolished, he is allowed to leave his owner's 
estate and work or trade for himself elsewhere, under the 
condition that he shall pay an annual sum. What is it 
which, in these cases, leads us to qualify our conception of 
the slavery as more or less severe ? Evidently the greater 
or smaller extent to which effort is compulsorily expended 
for the benefit of another instead of for self -benefit. If all 
the slave's labour is for his owner the slavery is heavy, and 
if but little it is light. Take now a further step. Suppose 
an owner dies, and his estate with its slaves comes into the 
hands of trustees ; or suppose the estate and everything on 
it to be bought by a company ; is the condition of the slave 
any the better if the amount of his compulsory labour re- 
mains the same ? Suppose that for a company we substitute 
the community ; does it make any difference to the slave if 
the time he has to work for others is as great, and the time 
left for himself is as small, as before ? The essential ques- 
tion is — How much is he compelled to labour for other 
benefit than his own, and how much can he labour for his 
own benefit ? The degree of his slavery varies according to 
the ratio between that which he is forced to yield up and 
that which he is allowed to retain ; and it matters not 
whether his master is a single person or a society. If, with- 
out option, he has to labour for the society, and receives from 

THE COMING SLAVEEY. 

43 

the general stock such portion as the society awards him, he 
becomes a slave to the society. Socialistic arrangements 
necessitate an enslavement of this kind ; and towards such 
an enslavement many recent measures, and still more the 
measures advocated, are carrying us. Let us observe, 
first, their proximate effects, and then their ultimate ef- 
fects. 

The policy initiated by the Industrial Dwellings Acts ad- 
mits of development, and will develop. Where municipal 
bodies turn house-builders, they inevitably lower the values 
of houses otherwise built, and check the supply of more. 
Every dictation respecting modes of building and conven- 
iences to be provided, diminishes the builder's profit, and 
prompts him to use his capital where the profit is not thus 
diminished. So, too, the owner, already finding that small 
houses entail much labour and many losses — already subject 
to troubles of inspection and interference, and to consequent 
costs, and having his property daily rendered a more un- 
desirable investment, is prompted to sell; and as buyers 
are for like reasons deterred, he has to sell at a loss. And 
now these still-multiplying regulations, ending, it may be, as 
Lord Grey proposes, in one requiring the owner to maintain 
the salubrity of his houses by evicting dirty tenants, and 
thus adding to his other responsibilities that of inspector of 
nuisances, must further prompt sales and further deter pur- 
chasers : so necessitating greater depreciation. "What must 
happen ? The multiplication of houses, and especially small 
houses, being increasingly checked, there must come an in- 
creasing demand upon the local authority to make up for the 
deficient supply. More and more the municipal or kindred 
body will have to build houses, or to purchase houses 
rendered unsaleable to private persons in the way shown — 
houses which, greatly lowered in value as they must become, 
it will, in many cases, pay to buy rather than to build new 
ones. Nay, this process must work in a double way ; since 
every entailed increase of local taxation still further depre- 

44 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

ciates property.* And then when in towns this process has 
gone so far as to make the local authority the chief owner of 
houses, there will be a good precedent for publicly providing 
houses for the rural population, as proposed in the Radical 
programme,! and as urged by the Democratic Federation ; 
which insists on " the compulsory construction of healthy 
artisans' and agricultural labourers' dwellings in proportion 
to the population." Manifestly, the tendency of that which 
has been done, is being done, and is presently to be done, is 
to approach the socialistic ideal in which the community is 
sole house-proprietor. 

Such, too, must be the effect of the daily-growing policy 
on the tenure and utilization of the land. More numerous 
public benefits, to be achieved by more numerous public 
agencies, at the cost of augmented public burdens, must in- 
creasingly deduct from the returns on land ; until, as the 
depreciation in value becomes greater and greater, the resist- 
ance to change of tenure becomes less and less. Already, as 
every one knows, there is in many places difficulty in ob- 
taining tenants, even at greatly reduced rents ; and land of 
inferior fertility in some cases lies idle, or when farmed by 
the owner is often farmed at a loss. Clearly the profit on 
capital invested in land is not such that taxes, local and 
general, can be greatly raised to support extended public ad- 

* If any one thinks such fears are groundless, let him contemplate the 
fact that from 1867-8 to 1880-1, our annual local expenditure for the United 
Kingdom has grown from £36,132,834 to £63,276,283; and that during the 
same 13 years, the municipal expenditure in England and Wales alone, has 
grown from 13 millions to 30 millions a year ! How the increase of public 
burdens will join with other causes in bringing about public ownership, is 
shown by a statement made by Mr. W. Rathbone, M. P., to which my atten- 
tion has been drawn since the above paragraph was in type. He says, " with- 
in my own experience, local taxation in New York has risen from 12s. 6d 
per cent, to £2 12s. Qd. per cent, on the capital of its citizens — a charge 
which would more than absorb the whole income of an average English 
landlord." — Nineteenth Century, February, 1883. 

f Fortnightly Review, November, 1883, pp. 619-20. 

THE COMING SLAVERY. 

45 

ministrations, without an absorption of it which will prompt 
owners to sell, and make the best of what reduced price they 
can get by emigrating and buying land not subject to heavy 
burdens ; as, indeed, some are now doing. This process, 
carried far, must have the result of throwing inferior land 
out of cultivation; after which there will be raised more 
generally the demand made by Mr. Arch, who, addressing 
the Radical Association of Brighton lately, and, contending 
that existing landlords do not make their land adequately 
productive for the public benefit, said " he should like the 
present Government to pass a Compulsory Cultivation Bill : " 
an applauded proposal which he justified by instancing com- 
pulsory vaccination (thus illustrating the influence of prece- 
dent). And this demand will be pressed, not only by the 
need for making the land productive, but also by the need 
for employing the rural population. After the Government 
has extended the practice of hiring the unemployed to work 
on deserted lands, or lands acquired at nominal prices, there 
will be reached a stage whence there is but a small further 
step to that arrangement which, in the programme of the 
Democratic Federation, is to follow nationalization of the 
land — the " organization of agricultural and industrial armies 
under State control on co-operative principles." 

To one who doubts whether such a revolution may be so 
reached, facts may be cited showing its likelihood. In Gaul, 
during the decline of the Roman Empire, " so numerous were 
the receivers in comparison with the payers, and so enormous 
the weight of taxation, that the labourer broke down, the 
plains became deserts, and woods grew where the plough had 
been." * In like manner, when the French Revolution was 
approaching, the public burdens had become such, that many 
farms remained uncultivated and many were deserted : one- 
quarter of the soil was absolutely lying waste ; and in some 
provinces one-half was in heath.f Nor have we been without 

* Lactant. Be M. Persecut., cc. 7, 23. 

f Taine, UAncien Regime, pp. 337-8 (in the English Translation). 

46 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

incidents of a kindred nature at home. Besides the facts that 
under the old Poor Law the rates had in some parishes risen 
to half the rental, and that in various places farms were lying 
idle, there is the fact that in one case the rates had absorbed 
the whole proceeds of the soil. 

At Cholesbury, in Buckinghamshire, in 1832, the poor rate "sud- 
denly ceased in consequence of the impossibility to continue its 
collection, the landlords have given up their rents, the farmers their 
tenancies, and the clergyman his glebe and his tithes. The clergyman, 
Mr. Jeston, states that in October, 1832, the parish officers threw up 
their books, and the poor assembled in a body before his door while 
he was in bed, asking for advice and food. Partly from his own small 
means, partly from the charity of neighbours, and partly by rates in 
aid, imposed on the neighbouring parishes, they were for some time 
supported."* 

And the Commissioners add that "the benevolent rector 
recommends that the whole of the land should be divided 
among the able-bodied paupers : " hoping that after help 
afforded for two years they might be able to maintain them- 
selves. These facts, giving colour to the prophecy made in 
Parliament that continuance of the old Poor Law for another 
thirty years would throw the land out of cultivation, clearly 
show that increase of public burdens may end in forced 
cultivation under public control. 

Then, again, comes State-ownership of railways. Already 
this exists to a large extent on the Continent. Already we 
have had here a few years ago loud advocacy of it. And 
now the cry, which was raised by sundry politicians and 
publicists, is taken up afresh by the Democratic Federation ; 
which proposes " State-appropriation of railways, with or 
without compensation." Evidently pressure from above 
joined by pressure from below, is likely to effect this change 
dictated by the policy everywhere spreading; and with it 
must come many attendant changes. For railway-proprietors, 

* Report of Commissioners for Inquiry into the Administration and 
Practical Operation of the Poor Laws, p. 37. February 20, 1834. 

THE COMING SLAVEEY. 

47 

at first owners and workers of railways only, have become 
masters of numerous businesses directly or indirectly con- 
nected with railways ; and these will have to be purchased by 
Government when the railways are purchased. Already 
exclusive letter-carrier, exclusive transmitter of telegrams, 
and on the way to become exclusive carrier of parcels, the 
State will not only be exclusive carrier of passengers, goods, 
and minerals, but will add to its present various trades many 
other trades. Even now, besides erecting its naval and 
military establishments and building harbours, docks, break- 
waters, &c, it does the work of ship-builder, cannon-founder, 
small-arms maker, manufacturer of ammunition, army-clothier 
and boot-maker; and when the railways have been appro- 
priated " with or without compensation," as the Democratic 
Federationists say, it will have to become locomotive-engine- 
builder, carriage-maker, tarpaulin and grease manufacturer, 
passenger-vessel owner, coal-miner, stone-quarrier, omnibus 
proprietor, &c. Meanwhile its local lieutenants, the municipal 
governments, already in may places suppliers of water, gas- 
makers, owners and workers of tramways, proprietors of 
baths, will doubtless have undertaken various other businesses. 
And when the State, directly or by proxy, has thus come into 
possession of, or has established, numerous concerns for 
wholesale production and for wholesale distribution, there 
will be good precedents for extending its function to retail 
distribution: following such an example, say, as is offered 
by the French Government, which has long been a retail 
tobacconist. 

Evidently then, the changes made, the changes in progress, 
and the changes urged, will carry us not only towards State- 
ownership of land and dwellings and means of communica- 
tion, all to be administered and worked by State-agents, but 
towards State-usurpation of all industries : the private forms 
of which, disadvantaged more and more in competition with 
the State, which can arrange everything for its own conven- 
ience^ will more and more die away ; just as many voluntary 

48 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

schools have, in presence of Board-schools. And so will be 
brought about the desired ideal of the socialists. 

And now when there has been compassed this desired 
ideal, which " practical " politicians are helping socialists to 
reach, and which is so tempting on that bright 6ide which 
socialists contemplate, what must be the accompanying shady 
side which they do not contemplate ? It is a matter of 
common remark, often made when a marriage is impending, 
that those possessed by strong hopes habitually dwell on the 
promised pleasures and think nothing of the accompanying 
pains. A further exemplification of this truth is supplied 
by these political enthusiasts and fanatical revolutionists. 
Impressed with the miseries existing under our present social 
arrangements, and not regarding these miseries as caused by 
the ill-working of a human nature but partially adapted to 
the social state, they imagine them to be forthwith curable by 
this or that rearrangement. Yet, even did their plans succeed 
it could only be by substituting one kind of evil for another. 
A little deliberate thought would show that under their pro- 
posed arrangements, their liberties must be surrendered in 
proportion as their material welfares were cared for. 

For no form of co-operation, small or great, can be carried 
on without regulation, and an implied submission to the reg- 
ulating agencies. Even one of their own organizations for 
effecting social changes yields them proof. It is compelled 
to have its councils, its local and general officers, its authori- 
tative leaders, who must be obeyed under penalty of confusion 
and failure. And the experience of those who are loudest in 
their advocacy of a new social order under the paternal 
control of a Government, shows that even in private volun- 
tarily-formed societies, the power of the regulative organiza- 
tion becomes great, if not irresistible : often, indeed, causing 
grumbling and restiveness among those controlled. Trades- 
unions which carry on a kind of industrial war in defence of 
workers' interests versus employers' interests, find that sub- 

THE COMING SLAVEET. 

49 

ordination almost military in its strictness is needful to secure 
efficient action ; for divided councils prove fatal to success. 
And even in bodies of co-operators, formed for carrying on 
manufacturing or distributing businesses, and not needing 
that obedience to leaders which is required where the aims 
are offensive or defensive, it is still found that the adminis- 
trative agency gains such supremacy that there arise com- 
plaints about "the tyranny of organization." Judge then 
what must happen when, instead of relatively small combina- 
tions, to which men may belong or not as they please, we 
have a national combination in which each citizen finds 
himself incorporated, and from which he cannot separate 
himself without leaving the country. Judge what must 
under such conditions become the despotism of a graduated 
and centralized officialism, holding in its hands the resources 
of the community, and having behind it whatever amount of 
force it finds requisite to carry out its decrees and maintain 
what it calls order. Well may Prince Bismarck display 
leanings towards State-socialism. 

And then after recognizing, as they must if they think 
out their scheme, the power possessed by the regulative 
agency in the new social system so temptingly pictured, let 
its advocates ask themselves to what end this power must be 
used. Not dwelling exclusively, as they habitually do, on 
the material well-being and the mental gratifications to be 
provided for them by a beneficent administration, let them 
dwell a little on the price to be paid. The officials cannot 
create the needful supplies : they can but distribute among 
individuals that which the individuals have joined to produce. 
If the public agency is required to provide for them, it must 
reciprocally require them to furnish the means. There can- 
not be, as under our existing system, agreement between 
employer and employed — this the scheme excludes. There 
must in place of it be command by local authorities over 
workers, and acceptance by the workers of that which the 
authorities assign to them. And this, indeed, is the arrange- 

50 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

merit distinctly, but as it would seem inadvertently, pointed 
to by the members of the Democratic Federation. For they 
propose that production should be carried on by " agricult- 
ural and industrial armies under State-control : " apparently 
not remembering that armies pre-suppose grades of officers, 
by whom obedience would have to be insisted upon ; since 
otherwise neither order nor efficient work could be ensured. 
So that each would stand toward the governing agency in 
the relation of slave to master. 

" But the governing agency would be a master which he 
and others made and kept constantly in check ; and one 
which therefore would not control him or others more than 
was needful for the benefit of each and all." 

To which reply the first rejoinder is that, even if so, each 
member of the community as an individual would be a 6lave 
to the community as a whole. Such a relation has habitually 
existed in militant communities, even under quasi-popular 
forms of government. In ancient Greece the accepted prin- 
ciple was that the citizen belonged neither to himself nor to 
his family, but belonged to his city — the city being with 
the Greek equivalent to the community. And this doctrine, 
proper to a state of constant warfare, is a doctrine which 
socialism unawares re-introduces into a state intended to be 
purely industrial. The services of each will belong to the 
aggregate of all ; and for these services, such returns will be 
given as the authorities think proper. So that even if the 
administration is of the beneficent kind intended to be se- 
cured, slavery, however mild, must be the outcome of the 
arrangement. 

A second rejoinder is that the administration will pres- 
ently become not of the intended kind, and that the slavery 
will not be mild. The socialist speculation is vitiated by an 
assumption like that which vitiates the speculations of the 
" practical " politician. It is assumed that officialism will 
work as it is intended to work, which it never does. The 
machinery of Communism, like existing social machinery, 

THE COMING SLAVERY. 

51 

has to be framed out of existing human nature ; and the de- 
fects of existing human nature will generate in the one the 
same evils as in the other. The love of power, the selfish- 
ness, the injustice, the untruthfulness, which often in com- 
paratively short times bring private organizations to disaster, 
will inevitably, where their effects accumulate from genera- 
tion to generation, work evils far greater and less remediable ; 
since, vast and complex and possessed of all the resources, 
the administrative organization once developed and consoli- 
dated, must become irresistible. And if there needs proof 
that the periodic exercise of electoral power would fail to 
prevent this, it suffices to instance the French Government, 
which, purely popular in origin, and subject at short intervals 
to popular judgment, nevertheless tramples on the freedom 
of citizens to an extent which the English delegates to the 
late Trades Unions Congress say " is a disgrace to, and an 
anomaly in, a Republican nation." 

The final result would be a revival of despotism. A dis- 
ciplined army of civil officials, like an army of military offi- 
cials, gives supreme power to its head — a power which has 
often led to usurpation, as in mediaeval Europe and still more 
in Japan — nay, has thus so led among our neighbours, within 
our own times. The recent confessions of M. de Maupas 
have shown how readily a constitutional head, elected and 
trusted by the whole people, may, with the aid of a few un- 
scrupulous confederates, paralyze the representative body 
and make himself autocrat. That those who rose to power 
in a socialistic organization would not scruple to carry out 
their aims at all costs, we have good reason for concluding. 
When we find that shareholders who, sometimes gaining but 
often losing, have made that railway-system by which na- 
tional prosperity has been so greatly increased, are spoken of 
by the council of the Democratic Federation as having " laid 
hands " on the means of communication, we may infer that 
those who directed a socialistic administration might inter- 
pret with extreme perversity the claims of individuals and 

52 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

classes under their control. And when, further, we find 
members of this same council urging that the State should 
take possession of the railways, " with or without compen- 
sation," we may suspect that the heads of the ideal society 
desired, would be but little deterred by considerations of 
equity from pursuing whatever policy they thought needful : 
a policy which would always be one identified with their 
own supremacy. It would need but a war with an adja- 
cent society, or some internal discontent demanding forcible 
suppression, to at once transform a socialistic administration 
into a grinding tyranny like that of ancient Peru ; under 
which the mass of the people, controlled by grades of offi- 
cials, and leading lives that were inspected out-of-doors and 
in-doors, laboured for the support of the organization which 
regulated them, and were left with but a bare subsistence for 
themselves. And then would be completely revived, under 
a different form, that regime of status — that system of com- 
pulsory co-operation, the decaying tradition of which is 
represented by the old Toryism, and towards which the new 
Toryism is carrying us back. 

" But we shall be on our guard against all that — we shall 
take precautions to ward off such disasters," will doubtless 
say the enthusiasts. Be they "practical" politicians with 
their new regulative measures, or communists with their 
schemes for re-organizing labour their reply is ever the 
6ame : — " It is true that plans of kindred nature have, from 
unforeseen causes or adverse accidents, or the misdeeds of 
those concerned, been brought to failure ; but this time we 
shall profit by past experiences and succeed." There seems 
no getting people to accept the truth, which nevertheless is 
conspicuous enough, that the welfare of a society and the 
justice of its arrangements are at bottom dependent on the 
characters of its members ; and that improvement in neither 
can take place without that improvement in character which 
results from carrying on peaceful industry under the re- 
straints imposed by an orderly social life. The belief, not 

THE COMING SLAVEEY. 

53 

only of the socialists but also of those so-called Liberals who 
are diligently preparing the way for them, is that by due 
skill an ill-working humanity may be framed into well- 
working institutions. It is a delusion. The defective na- 
tures of citizens will show themselves in the bad acting of 
whatever social structure they are arranged into. There is 
no political alchemy by which you can get golden conduct 
out of leaden instincts. 

Note. — Two replies by socialists to the foregoing article 
have appeared since its publication — Socialism and Slavery 
by H. M. Hyndman, and Herbert Spencer on Socialism by 
Frank Fairman. Notice of them here must be limited to 
saying that, as usual with antagonists, they ascribe to me 
opinions which I do not hold. Disapproval of socialism does 
not, as Mr. Hyndman assumes, necessitate approval of exist- 
ing arrangements. Many things he reprobates I reprobate 
quite as much ; but I dissent from his remedy. The gentle- 
man who writes under the pseudonym of " Frank Fairman," 
reproaches me with having receded from that sympathetic 
defence of the labouring-classes which he finds in Social 
Statics J but I am quite unconscious of any such change as 
he alleges. Looking with a lenient eye upon the irregulari- 
ties of those whose lives are hard, by no means involves 
tolerance of good-for-nothings. 

FROM FREEDOM TO BONDAGE. 

Op the many ways in which common-sense inferences 
about social affairs are flatly contradicted by events (as 
when measures taken to suppress a book cause increased cir- 
culation of it, or as when attempts to prevent usurious rates 
of interest make the terms harder for the borrower, or as 
when there is greater difficulty in getting things at the places 
of production than elsewhere) one of the most curious is the 
way in which the more things improve, the louder become 
the exclamations about their badness. 

In days when the people were without any political 
power, their subjection was rarely complained of; but after 
free institutions had so far advanced in England that our 
political arrangements were envied by Continental peoples, 
the denunciations of aristocratic rule grew gradually 
stronger, until there came a great widening of the fran- 
chise, soon followed by complaints that things were going 
wrong for want of still further widening. If we trace up 
the treatment of women from the days of savagedom, when 
they bore all the burdens and after the men had eaten re- 
ceived such food as remained, up through the Middle Ages 
when they served the men at their meals, to our own day 
when throughout our social arrangements the claims of 
women are always put first, we see that along with the worst 
treatment there went the least apparent consciousness that 
the treatment was bad; while now that they are better 

54 

FROM FREEDOM TO BONDAGE. 

55 

treated than ever before, the proclaiming of their griev- 
ances daily strengthens: the loudest outcries coming from 
"the paradise of women," America. A century ago, when 
scarcely a man could be found who was not occasionally in- 
toxicated, and when inability to take one or two bottles of 
wine brought contempt, no agitation arose against the vice 
of drunkenness; but now that, in the course of fifty years, 
the voluntary efforts of temperance societies, joined with 
more general causes, have produced comparative sobriety, 
there are vociferous demands for laws to prevent the ruinous 
effects of the liquor-traffic. Similarly again with education. 
A few generations back, ability to read and write was prac- 
tically limited to the upper and middle classes, and the 
suggestion that the rudiments of culture should be given 
to laborers was never made, or, if made, ridiculed; but 
when, in the days of our grandfathers, the Sunday-school 
system, initiated by a few philanthropists, began to spread 
and was followed by the establishment of day-schools, with 
the result that among the masses those who could read and 
write were no longer the exceptions, and the demand for 
cheap literature rapidly increased, there began the cry that 
the people were perishing for lack of knowledge, and that 
the State must not simply educate them but must force edu- 
cation upon them. 

And so is it, too, with the general state of the population 
in respect of food, clothing, shelter, and the appliances of 
life. Leaving out of the comparison early barbaric states, 
there has been a conspicuous progress from the time when 
most rustics lived on barley bread, rye bread, and oatmeal, 
down to our own time when the consumption of white 
wheaten bread is universal; from the days when coarse 
jackets reaching to the knees left the legs bare, down to the 
present day when laboring people, like their employers, have 
the whole body covered by two or more layers of clothing; 
from the old era of single-roomed huts without chimneys, 
or from the fifteenth century, when even an ordinary gen- 

56 

THE MAN VEESUS THE STATE. 

tleman's house was commonly without wainscot or plaster 
on its walls, down to the present century when every cottage 
has more rooms than one and the houses of artisans usually 
have several, while all have fire-places, chimneys, and glazed 
windows, accompanied mostly by paper-hangings and painted 
doors: there has been, I say, a conspicuous progress in the 
condition of the people. And this progress has been still 
more marked within our own time. Any one who can look 
back 60 years, when the amount of pauperism was far 
greater than now and beggars abundant, is struck by the 
comparative size and finish of the new houses occupied by 
operatives ; by the better dress of workmen, who wear broad- 
cloth on Sundays, and that of servant-girls, who vie with 
their mistresses; by the higher standard of living which 
leads to a great demand for the best qualities of food by 
working people: all results of the double change to higher 
wages and cheaper commodities, and a distribution of taxes 
which has relieved the lower classes at the expense of the 
upper classes. He is struck, too, by the contrast between 
the small space which popular welfare then occupied in 
public attention, and the large space it now occupies, with 
the result that outside and inside Parliament, plans to 
benefit the millions form the leading topics, and every one 
having means is expected to join in some philanthropic 
effort. Yet while elevation, mental and physical, of the 
masses is going on far more rapidly than ever before ; while 
the lowering of the death-rate proves that the average life 
is less trying ; there swells" louder and louder the cry that 
the evils are so great that nothing short of a social revolu- 
tion can cure them. In presence of obvious improvements, 
joined with that increase of longevity which even alone 
yields conclusive proof of general amelioration, it is pro- 
claimed with increasing vehemence that things are so bad 
that society must be pulled to pieces and reorganized on 
another plan. In this case, then, as in the previous cases 
instanced, in proportion as the evil decreases the denuncia- 

FEOM FEEEDOM TO BONDAGE. 

57 

tion of it increases ; and as fast as natural causes are shown 
to be powerful, there grows up the belief that they are 
powerless. 

Not that the evils to be remedied are small. Let no one 
suppose that, by emphasizing the above paradox, I wish to 
make light of the sufferings which most men have to bear. 
The fates of the great majority have ever been, and doubtless 
still are, so sad that it is painful to think of them. Unques- 
tionably the existing type of social organization is one which 
none who care for their kind can contemplate with satisfac- 
tion; and unquestionably men's activities accompanying this 
type are far from being admirable. The strong divisions of 
rank and the immense inequalities of means, are at variance 
with that ideal of human relations on which the sympathetic 
imagination likes to dwell; and the average conduct, under 
the pressure and excitement of social life as at present 
carried on, is in sundry respects repulsive. Though the 
many who revile competition strangely ignore the enormous 
benefits resulting from it; though they forget that most of 
the appliances and products distinguishing civilization from 
savagery, and making possible the maintenance of a large 
population on a small area, have been developed by the 
struggle for existence; though they disregard the fact that 
while every man, as producer, suffers from the underbidding 
of competitors, yet, as the consumer, he is immensely advan- 
taged by the cheapening of all he has to buy; though they 
persist in dwelling on the evils of competition and saying 
nothing of its benefits; yet it is not to be denied that the 
evils are great, and form a large set-off from the benefits. 
The system under which we at present live fosters dishonesty 
and lying. It prompts adulterations of countless kinds; it 
is answerable for the cheap imitations which eventually in 
many cases thrust the genuine articles out of the market; 
it leads to the use of short weights and false measures; it 
introduces bribery, which vitiates most trading relations 
from those of the manufacturer and buyer down to those 

58 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

of the shopkeeper and servant; it encourages deception to 
such an extent that an assistant who cannot tell a falsehood 
with a good face is blamed ; and often it gives the conscien- 
tious trader the choice between adopting the malpractices of 
his competitors, or greatly injuring his creditors by bank- 
ruptcy. Moreover, the extensive frauds, common throughout 
the commercial world and daily exposed in law-courts and 
newspapers, are largely due to the pressure under which 
competition places the higher industrial classes; and are 
otherwise due to that lavish expenditure which, as implying 
success in the commercial struggle, brings honor. "With these 
minor evils must be joined the major one, that the distribu- 
tion achieved by the system gives to those who regulate and 
superintend a share of the total produce which bears too 
large a ratio to the share it gives to the actual workers. Let 
it not be thought, then, that in saying what I have said 
above, I under-estimate those vices of our competitive system 
which thirty years ago, I described and denounced. But it 
is not a question of absolute evils ; it is a question of relative 
evils ; whether the evils at present suffered are or are not less 
than the evils which would be suffered under another sys- 
tem ; whether efforts for mitigation along the lines thus far 
followed are not more likely to succeed than efforts along 
utterly different lines. 

This is the question here to be considered. I must be ex- 
cused for first of all setting forth sundry truths which are, 
to same at any rate, tolerably familiar, before proceeding to 
draw inferences which are not so familiar. 

II. 

Speaking broadly, every man works that he may avoid 
suffering. Here, remembrance of the pangs of hunger 
prompts him ; and there, he is prompted by the sight of the 
slave-driver's lash. His immediate dread may be the pun- 

In an essay entitled The Morals of Trade. — Ed. 

FEOM FEEEDOM TO BONDAGE. 

59 

ishment which physical circumstances will inflict, or may be 
punishment inflicted by human agency. He must have a 
master; but the master may be Nature or may be a fellow- 
man. When he is under the impersonal coercion of Nature, 
we say that he is free ; and when he is under the personal 
coercion of some one above him, we call him, according to the 
degree of his dependence, a slave, a serf, or a vassal. Of 
course I omit the small minority who inherit means : an in- 
cidental, and not a necessary, social element. I speak only of 
the vast majority, both cultured and uncultured, who main- 
tain themselves by labor, bodily or mental, and must either 
exert themselves of their own unconstrained wills, prompted 
only by thoughts of naturally-resulting evils or benefits, or 
must exert themselves with constrained wills, prompted by 
thoughts of evils and benefits artificially resulting. 

Men may work together in a society under either of these 
two forms of control: forms which, though in many cases 
mingled, are essentially contrasted. Using the word co-op- 
eration in its wide sense, and not in that restricted sense 
now commonly given to it, we may say that social life must 
be carried on by either voluntary co-operation or compulsory 
co-operation; or, to use Sir Henry Maine's words, the sys- 
tem must be that of contract or that of status; that in which 
the individual is left to do the best he can by his spontaneous 
efforts and get success or failure according to his efficiency, 
and that in which he has his appointed place, works under 
coercive rule, and has his apportioned share of food, cloth- 
ing, and shelter. 

The system of voluntary co-operation is that by which, in 
civilized societies, industry is now everywhere carried on. 
Under a simple form we have it on every farm, where the 
laborers, paid by the farmer himself and taking orders di- 
rectly from him, are free to stay or go as they please. And 
of its more complex form an example is yielded by every 
manufacturing concern, in which, under partners, come 
managers and clerks; and under these, time-keepers and 

60 

THE MAN VEBSUS THE STATE. 

overlookers ; and under these, operatives of different grades. 
In each of these cases there is an obvious working together, 
or co-operation, of employer and employed, to obtain in the 
one case a crop and in the other case a manufactured stock. 
And then, at the same time, there is a far more extensive, 
though unconscious, co-operation with other workers of all 
grades throughout the society. For while these particular 
employers and employed are severally occupied with their 
special kinds of work, other employers and employed are 
making other things needed for the carrying on of their 
lives, as well as the lives of all others. This voluntary co- 
operation, from its simplest to its most complex forms, has 
the common trait that those concerned work together by 
consent. There is no one to force terms or to force-accept- 
ance. It is perfectly true that in many cases an employer 
may give, or an employe may accept, with reluctance : cir- 
cumstances, he says, compel him. But what are the circum- 
stances 1 In the one case there are goods ordered, or a con- 
tract entered into, which he cannot supply or execute with- 
out yielding ; and in the other case he submits to a wage less 
than he likes because otherwise he will have no money where- 
with to procure food and warmth. The general formula is 
not "Do this, or I will make you;" but it is "Do this, or 
leave your place and take the consequences." 

On the other hand, compulsory co-operation is exempli- 
fied by an army ; not so much by our own army, the service 
in which is under agreement for a specified period, but in a 
Continental army, raised by conscription. Here, in time of 
peace, the daily duties — cleaning, parade, drill, sentry-work, 
and the rest — and in time of war the various actions of the 
camp and the battle-field, are done under command, without 
room for any exercise of choice. Up from the private soldier 
through the non-commissioned officers and the half-dozen or 
more grades of commissioned officers, the unversal law is 
absolute obedience from the grade below to the grade above. 
The sphere of individual will is such only as is allowed by 

FEOM FEEEDOM TO BONDAGE. 

61 

the will of the superior. Breaches of subordination are, ac- 
cording to their gravity, dealt with by deprivation of leave, 
extra drill, imprisonment, flogging, and, in the last resort, 
shooting. Instead of the understanding that there must be 
obedience in respect of specified duties under pain of dis- 
missal, the understanding now is: "Obey in everything or- 
dered, under penalty of inflicted suffering and perhaps 
death." 

This form of co-operation, still exemplified in an army, 
has in days gone by been the form of co-operation through- 
out the civil population. Everywhere, and at all times, 
chronic war generates a militant type of structure, not in 
the body of soldiers only, but throughout the community at 
large. Practically, while the conflict between societies is 
actively going on, and fighting is regarded as the only manly 
occupation, the society is the quiescent army and the army 
the mobilized society : that part which does not take part in 
battle, composed of slaves, serfs, women, &c, constituting the 
commissariat. Naturally, therefore, throughout the mass of 
inferior individuals constituting the commissariat, there is 
maintained a system of discipline identical in nature if less 
elaborate. The fighting body being, under such conditions, 
the ruling body, and the rest of the community being in- 
capable of resistance, those who control the fighting body 
will, of course, impose their control upon the non-fighting 
body; and the regime of coercion will be applied to it with 
such modifications only as the different circumstances in- 
volve. Prisoners of war become slaves. Those who were 
free cultivators before the conquest of their country, become 
serfs attached to the soil. Petty chiefs become subject to 
superior chiefs; these smaller lords become vassals to over- 
lords; and so on up to the highest: the social ranks and 
powers being of like essential nature with the ranks and 
powers throughout the military organization. And while 
for the slaves compulsory co-operation is the unqualified 
system, a co-operation which is in part compulsory is the 

62 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

system that pervades all grades above. Each, man's oath of 
fealty to his suzerain takes the form, "I am your man." 

Throughout Europe, and especially in our own country, 
this system of compulsory co-operation gradually relaxed in 
rigor, while the system of voluntary co-operation step by 
step replaced it. As fast as war ceased to be the business 
of life, the social structure produced by war, and appropri- 
ate to it, slowly became qualified by the social structure 
produced by industrial life, and appropriate to it. In pro- 
portion as a decreasing part of the community was devoted 
to offensive and defensive activities, an increasing part be- 
came devoted to production and distribution. Growing 
more numerous, more powerful, and taking refuge in towns 
where it was less under the power of the militant class, this 
industrial population carried on its life under the system 
of voluntary co-operation. Though municipal governments 
and guild-regulations, partially pervaded by ideas and 
usages derived from the militant type of society, were in 
some degree coercive ; yet production and distribution were 
in the main carried on under agreement, alike between 
buyers and sellers, and between masters and workmen. As 
fast as these social relations and forms of activity became 
dominant in urban populations, they influenced the whole 
community : compulsory co-operation lapsed more and more, 
through money-commutation for services, military and civil ; 
while divisions of rank became less rigid and class-power 
diminished, until at length, restraints exercised by incor- 
porated trades having fallen into desuetude, as well as the 
rule of rank over rank, voluntary co-operation became the 
universal principle. Purchase and sale became the law for 
all kinds of services as well as for all kinds of commodities. 

III. 

The restlessness generated by pressure against the con- 
ditions of existence perpetually prompts the desire to try 
a new position. Every one knows how long-continued rest 

FEOM FREEDOM TO BONDAGE. 

63 

in one attitude becomes -wearisome ; everyone has found how 
even the best easy chair, at first rejoiced in, becomes after 
many hours intolerable; and change to a hard seat, previ- 
ously occupied and rejected, seems for a time to be a great 
relief. It is the same with incorporated humanity. Having 
by long struggles emancipated itself from the hard disci- 
pline of the ancient regime, and having discovered that the 
new regime into which it has grown, though relatively easy, 
is not without stresses and pains, its impatience with these 
prompts the wish to try another system : which other system 
is, in principle if not in appearance, the same as that which 
during past generations was escaped from with much 
rejoicing. 

For as fast as the regime of contract is discarded, the 
regime of status is of necessity adopted. As fast as vol- 
untary co-operation is abandoned, compulsory co-operation 
must be substituted. Some kind of organization labor must 
have ; and if it is not that which arises by agreement under 
free competition, it must be that which is imposed by 
authority. Unlike in appearance and names as it may be to 
the old order of slaves and serfs, working under masters, 
who were coerced by barons who were themselves vassals of 
dukes or kings; the new order wished for, constituted by 
workers under foremen of small groups, overlooked by super- 
intendents, who are subject to higher local managers, who 
are controlled by superiors of districts, themselves under a 
central government, must be essentially the same in prin- 
ciple. In the one case, as in the other, there must be estab- 
lished grades, and enforced subordination of each grade to 
the grades above. This is a truth which the communist or 
the socialist does not dwell upon. Angry with the existing 
system under which each of us takes care of himself while all 
of us see that each has fair play, he thinks how much better 
it would be for all of us to take care of each of us ; and he 
refrains from thinking of the machinery by which this is to 
be done. Inevitably, if each is to be cared for by all, then 

64 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

the embodied all must get the means — the necessaries of 
life. What it gives to each must be taken from the accumu- 
lated contributions ; and it must therefore require from each 
his proportion — must tell him how much he has to give to 
the general stock in the shape of production, that he may 
have so much in the shape of sustentation. Hence, before 
he can be provided for, he must put himself under orders, 
and obey those who say what he shall do, and at what hours, 
and where; and who give him his share of food, clothing, 
and shelter. If competition is excluded, and with it buying 
and selling, there can be no voluntary exchange of so much 
labor for so much produce ; but there must be apportionment 
of the one to the other by appointed officers. This appor- 
tionment must be enforced. Without alternative the work 
must be done, and without alternative the benefit, whatever 
it may be, must be accepted. For the worker may not leave 
his place at will and offer himself elsewhere. Under such 
a system he cannot be accepted elsewhere, save by order of 
the authorities. And it is manifest that a standing order 
would forbid employment in one place of an insubordinate 
member from another place : the system could not be worked 
if the workers were severally allowed to go or come as they 
pleased. With corporals and sergeants under them, the 
captains of industry must carry out the orders of their 
colonels, and these of their generals, up to the council of the 
commander-in-chief; and obedience must be required 
throughout the industrial army as throughout a fighting 
army. "Do your prescribed duties, and take your appor- 
tioned rations, ' ' must be the rule of the one as of the other. 

"Well, be it so," replies the socialist. "The workers 
will appoint their own officers, and these will always be sub- 
ject to criticisms of the mass they regulate. Being thus in 
fear of public opinion, they will be sure to act judiciously 
and fairly; or when they do not, will be deposed by the 
popular vote, local or general. Where will be the grievance 
of being under superiors, when the superiors themselves are 

FEOM FREEDOM TO BONDAGE. 

65 

under democratic control?" And in this attractive vision 
the socialist has full belief. 

IV. 

Iron and brass are simpler things than flesh and blood, 
and dead wood than living nerve; and a machine con- 
structed of the one works in more definite ways than an 
organism constructed of the other; especially when the ma- 
chine is worked by the inorganic forces of steam or water, 
while the organism is worked by the forces of living nerve- 
centres. Manifestly, then, the ways in which the machine 
will work are much more readily calculable than the ways 
in which the organism will work. Yet in how few cases 
does the inventor foresee rightly the actions of his new ap- 
paratus ! Read the patent-list, and it will be found that not 
more than one device in fifty turns out to be of any service. 
Plausible as his scheme seemed to the inventor, one or other 
hitch prevents the intended operation, and brings out a 
widely different result from that which he wished. 

What, then, shall we say of these schemes which have to 
do not with dead matters and forces, but with complex 
living organisms working in ways less readily foreseen, and 
which involve the co-operation of multitudes of such organ- 
isms? Even the units out of which this rearranged body 
politic is to be formed are often incomprehensible. Every 
one is from time to time surprised by others' behavior, and 
even by the deeds of relatives who are best known to him. 
Seeing, then, how uncertainly any one can foresee the ac- 
tions of an individual, how can he with any certainty fore- 
see the operation of a social structure ? He proceeds on the 
assumption that all concerned will judge rightly and act 
fairly; will think as they ought to think, and act as they 
ought to act; and he assumes this regardless of the daily 
experiences which show him that men do neither the one 
nor the other, and forgetting that the complaints he makes 
against the existing system show his belief to be that men 

66 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

have neither the wisdom nor the rectitude which his plan 
requires them to have. 

Paper constitutions raise smiles on the faces of those 
who have observed their results; and paper social systems 
similarly affect those who have contemplated the available 
evidence. How little the men who wrought the French 
Revolution and were chiefly concerned in setting up the new 
governmental apparatus, dreamt that one of the early ac- 
tions of this apparatus would be to behead them all ! How 
little the men who drew up the American Declaration of In- 
dependence and framed the republic, anticipated that after 
some generations the legislature would lapse into the hands 
of wire-pullers ; that its doings would turn upon the contests 
of office-seekers; that political action would be everywhere 
vitiated by the intrusion of a foreign element holding the 
balance between parties ; that electors, instead of judging for 
themselves, would habitually be led to the polls in thousands 
by their "bosses"; and that respectable men would be 
driven out of public life by the insults and slanders of pro- 
fessional politicians. Nor were there better previsions in 
those who gave constitutions to the various other states of 
the New "World, in which unnumbered revolutions have 
shown with wonderful persistence the contrasts between the 
expected results of political systems and the achieved re- 
sults. It has been no less thus with proposed systems of 
social reorganization, so far as they have been tried. Save 
where celibacy has been insisted on, their history has been 
everywhere one of disaster; ending with the history of 
Cabet's Icarian colony lately given by one of its members, 
Madame Fleury Robinson, in The Open Court; a history of 
splittings, re-splittings, and re-re-splittings, accompanied by 
numerous individual secessions and final dissolution. And 
for the failure of such social schemes, as for the failure of 
the political schemes, there has been one general cause. 

Metamorphosis is the universal law, exemplified through- 
out the heavens and on the earth : especially throughout the 

FEOM FEEEDOM TO BONDAGE. 

67 

organic world; and above all in the animal division of it. 
No creature, save the simplest and most minute, commences 
its existence in a form like that which it eventually assumes, 
and in most cases the unlikeness is great ; so great that kin- 
ship between the first and the last forms would be incredible 
were it not daily demonstrated in every poultry-yard and 
every garden. More than this is true. The changes of form 
are often several: each of them being an apparently com- 
plete transformation; egg, larva, pupa, imago, for example. 
And this universal metamorphosis, displayed alike in the 
development of a planet and of every seed which germinates 
on its surface, holds also of societies, whether taken as wholes 
or in their separate institutions. No one of them ends as it 
begins; and the difference between its original structure 
and its ultimate structure is such that, at the outset, change 
of the one into the other would have seemed incredible. 
In the rudest tribe the chief, obeyed as leader in war, loses 
his distinctive position when the fighting is over; and even 
where continued warfare has produced permanent chief- 
tainship, the chief, building his own hut, getting his own 
food, making his own implements, differs from others only 
by his predominant influence. There is no sign that in 
course of time, by conquests and unions of tribes, and con- 
solidations of clusters so formed with other such clusters, 
until a nation has been produced, there will originate from 
the primitive chief, one who, as czar or emperor, surrounded 
with pomp and ceremony, has despotic power over scores of 
millions, exercised through hundreds of thousands of soldiers 
and hundreds of thousands of officials. When the early 
Christian missionaries, having humble externals and pass- 
ing self-denying lives, spread over pagan Europe, preaching 
forgiveness of injuries and the returning of good for evil, 
no one dreamt that in course of time their representatives 
would form a vast hierarchy, possessing everywhere a large 
part of the land, distinguished by the haughtiness of its 
members, grade above grade ; ruled by military bishops who 

68 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

led their retainers to battle, and headed by a pope exercising 
supreme power over kings. So, too, has it been with that 
very industrial system which many are now so eager to re- 
place. In its original form there was no prophecy of the 
factory-system or kindred organizations of workers. Differ- 
ing from them only as being the head of his house, the 
master worked along with his apprentices and a journeyman 
or two, sharing with them his table and accommodation, 
and himself selling their joint produce. Only with indus- 
trial growth did there come employment of a larger number 
of assistants, and a relinquishment, on the part of the 
master, of all other business than that of superintendence. 
And only in the course of recent times did there evolve the 
organizations under which the labors of hundreds and 
thousands of men receiving wages, are regulated by various 
orders of paid officials under a single or multiple head. 
These originally small semi-socialistic groups of producers, 
like the compound families or house-communities of early 
ages, slowly dissolved because they could not hold their 
ground: the larger establishments, with better sub-division 
of labor, succeeded because they ministered to the wants of 
society more effectually. But we need not go back through 
the centuries to trace transformations sufficiently great and 
unexpected. On the day when £30,000 a year in aid of 
education was voted as an experiment, the name of idiot 
would have been given to an opponent who prophesied that 
in fifty years the sum spent through imperial taxes and 
local rates would amount to £10,000,000, or who said that the 
aid to education would be followed by aids to feeding and 
clothing, or who said that parents and children, alike de- 
prived of all option, would, even if starving, be compelled 
by fine or imprisonment to conform, and receive that which, 
with papal assumption, the State calls education. No one, 
I say, would have dreamt that out of so innocent-looking 
a germ would have so quickly evolved this tyrannical system, 
tamely submitted to by people who fancy themselves free. 

FEOM FKEEDOM TO BONDAGE. 

69 

Thus in social arrangements, as in all other things, 
change is inevitable. It is foolish to suppose that new in- 
stitutions set up will long retain the character given them 
by those who set them up. Rapidly or slowly they will be 
transformed into institutions unlike those intended ; so un- 
like as even to be unrecognizable by their devisers. And 
what, in the case before us, will be the metamorphosis ? The 
answer pointed to by instances above given, and warranted 
by various analogies, is manifest. 

A cardinal trait in all advancing organization is the de- 
velopment of the regulative apparatus. If the parts of a 
whole are to act together, there must be appliances by which 
their actions are directed ; and in proportion as the whole is 
large and complex, and has many requirements to be met by 
many agencies, the directive apparatus must be extensive, 
elaborate, and powerful. That it is thus with individual 
organisms needs no saying; and that it must be thus with 
social organisms is obvious. Beyond the regulative appara- 
tus such as in our own society is required for carrying on 
national defence and maintaining public order and personal 
safety, there must, under the regime of socialism, be a regu- 
lative apparatus everywhere controlling all kinds of produc- 
tion and distribution, and everywhere apportioning the 
shares of products of each kind required for each locality, 
each working establishment, each individual. Under our 
existing voluntary co-operation, with its free contracts and 
its competition, production and distribution need no official 
oversight. Demand and supply, and the desire of each man 
to gain a living by supplying the needs of his fellows, spon- 
taneously evolve that wonderful system whereby a great city 
has its food daily brought round to all doors or stored at 
adjacent shops; has clothing for its citizens everywhere at 
hand in multitudinous varieties; has its houses and furni- 
ture and fuel ready made or stocked in each locality; and 
has mental pabulum, from halfpenny papers hourly hawked 
round to weekly shoals of novels and less abundant books of 

70 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

instruction, furnished without stint for small payments. 
And throughout the kingdom, production as well as dis- 
tribution is similarly carried on with the smallest amount 
of superintendence which proves efficient ; while the quanti- 
ties of the numerous commodities required daily in each 
locality are adjusted without any other agency than the 
pursuit of profit. Suppose now that this industrial regime 
of willinghood, acting spontaneously, is replaced by a regime 
of industrial obedience, enforced by public officials. Im- 
agine the vast administration required for that distribution 
of all commodities to all people in every city, town and vil- 
lage, which is now effected by traders ! Imagine, again, the 
still more vast administration required for doing all that 
farmers, manufacturers, and merchants do ; having not only 
its various orders of local superintendents, but its sub- 
centres and chief centres needed for apportioning the quan- 
tities of each thing everywhere needed, and the adjust- 
ment of them to the requisite times. Then add the staffs 
wanted for working mines, railways, roads, canals ; the staffs 
required for conducting the importing and exporting busi- 
nesses and the administration of mercantile shipping, the 
staffs required for supplying towns not only with water and 
gas but with locomotion by tramways, omnibuses, and other 
vehicles, and for the distribution of power, electric and 
other. Join with these the existing postal, telegraphic, and 
telephonic administrations; and finally those of the police 
and army, by which the dictates of this immense consolidated 
regulative system are to be everywhere enforced. Imagine 
all this, and then ask what will be the position of the actual 
workers! Already on the Continent, where governmental 
organizations are more elaborate and coercive than here, 
there are chronic complaints of the tyranny of bureaucracies, 
the hauteur and brutality of their members. What will 
these become when not only the more public actions of 
citizens are controlled, but there is added this far more ex- 
tensive control of all their respective daily duties? What 

FKOM FEEEDOM TO BONDAGE. 

71 

will happen when the various divisions of this vast army of 
officials, united by interests common to officialism — the in- 
terests of the regulators versus those of the regulated — have 
at their command whatever force is needful to suppress in- 
subordination and act as "saviors of society"? "Where will 
be the actual diggers and miners and smelters and weavers, 
when those who order and superintend, everywhere ar- 
ranged class above class, have come, after some generations, 
to inter-marry with those of kindred grades, under feelings 
such as are operative in existing classes; and when there 
have been so produced a series of castes rising in superior- 
ity,- and when all these having' everything in their own 
power, have arranged modes of living for their own advan- 
tage : eventually forming a new aristocracy far more elab- 
orate and better organized than the old? How will the 
individual worker fare if he is dissatisfied with his treat- 
ment ; thinks that he has not an adequate share of the prod- 
ucts, or has more to do than can rightly be demanded, or 
wishes to undertake a function for which he feels himself 
fitted but which is not thought proper for him by his su- 
periors, or desires to make an independent career for him- 
self ? This dissatisfied unit in the immense machine will be 
told he must submit or go. The mildest penalty for 
disobedience will be industrial excommunication. And if an 
international organization of labor is formed as proposed, 
exclusion in one country will mean exclusion in all others; 
industrial excommunication will mean starvation. 

That things must take this course is a conclusion reached 
not by deduction only, nor only by induction from those ex- 
periences of the past instanced above, nor only from con- 
sideration of the analogies furnished by organisms of all 
orders; but it is reached also by observation of cases daily 
under our eyes. The truth that the regulative structure al- 
ways tends to increase in power, is illustrated by every 
established body of men. The history of each learned so- 
ciety, or society for other purpose, shows how the staff, 

72 THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

permanent or partially permanent, sways the proceedings 
and determines the actions of the society with but little re- 
sistance, even when most members of the society disapprove : 
the repugnance to anything like a revolutionary step being 
ordinarily an efficient deterrent. So is it with joint-stock 
companies ; those owning railways, for example. The plans 
of a board of directors are usually authorized with little or 
no discussion; and if there is any considerable opposition, 
this is forthwith crushed by an overwhelming number of 
proxies sent by those who always support the existing ad- 
ministration. Only when the misconduct is extreme does the 
resistance of shareholders suffice to displace the ruling body. 
Nor is it otherwise with societies formed of workingmen and 
having the interests of labor especially at heart ; the trades- 
unions. In these, too, the regulative agency becomes all- 
powerful. Their members, even when they dissent from the 
policy pursued, habitually yield to the authorities they have 
set up. As they cannot secede without making enemies of 
their fellow workmen, and often losing all chance of employ- 
ment, they succumb. "We are shown, too, by the late con- 
gress, that already, in the general organization of trades- 
unions so recently formed, there are complaints of "wire- 
pullers" and "bosses" and "permanent officials." If, then, 
this supremacy of the regulators is seen in bodies of quite 
modern origin, formed of men who have, in many of the 
cases instanced, unhindered powers of asserting their inde- 
pendence, what will the supremacy of the regulators become 
in long-established bodies, in bodies which have become vast 
and highly-organized; and in bodies which, instead of con- 
trolling only a small part of the unit's life, control the whole 
of his life? 

Again there will come the rejoinder, "T\Te shall guard 
against all that. Everybody will be educated; and all, with 
their eyes constantly open to the abuse of power, will be 
quick to prevent it." The worth of these expectations 
would be small, even could we not identify the causes which 

FKOM FEEEDOM TO BONDAGE. 

73 

will bring disappointment; for in human affairs the most 
promising schemes go wrong in ways which no one antici- 
pated. But in this case the going wrong will be necessitated 
by causes which are conspicuous. The working of institu- 
tions is determined by men's characters ; and the existing de- 
fects in their characters will inevitably bring about the 
results above indicated. There is no adequate endowment 
of those sentiments required to prevent the growth of a 
despotic bureaucracy. 

Were it needful to dwell on indirect evidence, much 
might be made of that furnished by the behavior of the so- 
called Liberal party ; a party which, relinquishing the origi- 
nal conception of a leader as a mouthpiece for a known 
and accepted policy, thinks itself bound to accept a policy 
which its leader springs upon it without consent or warn- 
ing ; a party so utterly without the feeling and idea implied 
by Liberalism, as not to resent this trampling on the right 
of private judgment which constitutes the root of Liberal- 
ism; nay, a party which vilifies as renegade Liberals, those 
of its members who refuse to surrender their independence ! 
But without occupying space with indirect proofs that the 
mass of men have not the natures required to check the de- 
velopment of tyrannical officialism, it will suffice to contem- 
plate the direct proofs furnished by those classes among 
whom the socialistic idea most predominates, and who think 
themselves most interested in propagating it; the operative 
classes. These would constitute the great body of the social- 
istic organization, and their characters would determine its 
nature. "What, then, are their characters as displayed in 
such organizations as they have already formed? 

Instead of the selfishness of the employing classes and 
the selfishness of competition, we are to have the unselfish- 
ness of a mutually- aiding system. How far is this unselfish- 
ness now shown in the behavior of working men to one 
another? "What shall we say to the rules limiting the 
numbers of new hands admitted into each trade, or to the 

74 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

rules which hinder ascent from inferior classes of workers 
to superior classes? One does not see in such regulations 
any of that altruism by which socialism is to be pervaded. 
Contrariwise, one sees a pursuit of private interests no less 
keen than among traders. Hence, unless we suppose that 
men's natures will be suddenly exalted, we must conclude 
that the pursuit of private interests will sway the doings of 
all the component classes in a socialistic society. 

With passive disregard of others' claims goes active en- 
croachment on them. "Be one of us or we will cut off your 
means of living, ' ' is the usual threat of each trades-union to 
outsiders of the same trade. While their members insist on 
their own freedom to combine and fix the rates at which they 
will work (as they are perfectly justified in doing), the free- 
dom of those who disagree with them is not only denied but 
the assertion of it is treated as a crime. Individuals who 
maintain their rights to make their own contracts are vilified 
as " blacklegs " and "traitors," and meet with violence which 
would be merciless were there no legal penalties and no 
police. Along with this trampling on the liberties of men of 
their own class, there goes peremptory dictation to the em- 
ploying class: not prescribed terms and working arrange- 
ments only shall be conformed to, but none save those 
belonging to their body shall be employed; nay, in some 
cases, there shall be a strike if the employer carries on trans- 
actions with trading bodies that give work to non-union men. 
Here, then, we are variously shown by trades-unions, or at 
any rate by the newer trades-unions, a determination to im- 
pose their regulations without regard to the rights of those 
who are to be coerced. So complete is the inversion of ideas 
and sentiments that maintenance of these rights is regarded 
as vicious and trespass upon them as virtuous.* 

* Marvellous are the conclusions men reach when once they desert the 
simple principle that each man should be allowed to pursue the objects 
of life, restrained only by the limits which the similar pursuits of their 
objects by other men impose. A generation ago we heard loud asser- 

FROM FREEDOM TO BONDAGE. 

75 

Along with this aggressiveness in one direction there goes 
submissiveness in another direction. The coercion of out- 
siders by unionists is paralleled only by their subjection to 
their leaders. That they may conquer in the struggle they 
surrender their individual liberties and individual judg- 
ments, and show no resentment, however dictatorial may 
be the rule exercised over them. Everywhere we see such 
subordination that bodies of workmen unanimously leave 
their work or return to it as their authorities order them. 
Nor do they resist when taxed all round to support strikers 
whose acts they may or may not approve, but instead, ill- 
treat recalcitrant members of their body who do not sub- 
scribe. 

The traits thus shown must be operative in any new 
social organization, and the question to be asked is, What will 
result from their operation when they are relieved from all 
restraints ? At present the separate bodies of men displaying 
them are in the midst of a society partially passive, partially 
antagonistic; are subject to the criticisms and reprobations 
of an independent press ; and are under the control of law, 
enforced by police. If in these circumstances these bodies 
habitually take courses which override individual freedom, 
what will happen when, instead of being only scattered 
parts of the community, governed by their separate sets 
of regulators, they constitute the whole community, gov- 

tions of "the right to labor," that is, the right to have labor pro- 
vided; and there are still not a few who think the community bound 
to find work for each person. Compare this with the doctrine current 
in France at the time when the monarchical power culminated ; namely, 
that "the right of working is a royal right which the prince can sell 
and the subjects must buy." This contrast is startling enough; but 
a contrast still more startling is being provided for us. We now see a 
resuscitation of the despotic doctrine, differing only by the substitution 
of trades-unions for kings. For now that trades-unions are becoming 
universal, and each artisan has to pay prescribed monies to one or 
another of them, with the alternative of being a non-unionist to whom 
work is denied by force, it has come to this: that the right to labor 
is a trade-union right, which the trade-union can sell and the individual 
worker must buy! 

76 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

erned by a consolidated system of such regulators; when 
functionaries of all orders, including those who officer the 
press, form parts of the regulative organization; and when 
the law is both enacted and administered by this regulative 
organization? The fanatical adherents of a social theory 
are capable of taking any measures, no matter how extreme, 
for carrying out their views: holding, like the merciless 
priesthoods of past times, that the end justifies the means. 
And when a general socialistic organization has been estab- 
lished, the vast, ramified, and consolidated body of those 
who direct its activities, using without check whatever coer- 
cion seems to them needful in the interests of the system 
(which will practically become their own interests) will 
have no hesitation in imposing their rigorous rule over the 
entire lives of the actual workers; until, eventually, there 
is developed an official oligarchy, with its various grades, 
exercising a tyranny more gigantic and more terrible than 
any which the world has seen. 

V. 

Let me again repudiate an erroneous inference. Any 
one who supposes that the foregoing argument implies con- 
tentment with things as they are, makes a profound mistake. 
The present social state is transitional, as past social states 
have been transitional. There will, I hope, and believe, 
come a future social state differing as much from the pres- 
ent as the present differs from the past with its mailed 
barons and defenceless serfs. In Social Statics, as well as 
in The Study of Sociology and in Political Institutions, is 
clearly shown the desire for an organization more condu- 
cive to the happiness of men at large than that which 
exists. My opposition to socialism results from the belief 
that it would stop the progress to such a higher state and 
bring back a lower state. Nothing but the slow modifica- 
tion of human nature by the discipline of social life can 
produce permanently advantageous changes. 

FEOM FEEEDOM TO BONDAGE. 

77 

A fundamental error pervading the thinking of nearly- 
all parties, political and social, is that evils admit of imme- 
diate and radical remedies. "If you will but do this, the 
mischief will be prevented." "Adopt my plan, and the 
suffering will disappear." "The corruption will unques- 
tionably be cured by enforcing this measure. ' ' Everywhere 
one meets with beliefs, expressed or implied, of these kinds. 
They are all ill-founded. It is possible to remove causes 
which intensify the evils; it is possible to change the evils 
from one form into another; and it is possible, and very 
common, to exacerbate the evils by the efforts made to 
prevent them; but anything like immediate cure is impos- 
sible. In the course of thousands of years mankind have, 
by multiplication, been forced out of that original savage 
state in which small numbers supported themselves on wild 
food, into the civilized state in which the food required for 
supporting great numbers can be got only by continuous 
labor. The nature required for this last mode of life is 
widely different from the nature required for the first ; and 
long-continued pains have to be passed through in re-mold- 
ing the one into the other. Misery has necessarily to be 
borne by a constitution out of harmony with its conditions ; 
and a constitution inherited from primitive men is out of 
harmony with the conditions imposed on existing men. 
Hence it is impossible to establish forthwith a satisfactory- 
social state. No such nature as that which has filled Europe 
with millions of armed men, here eager for conquest and 
there for revenge; no such nature as that which prompts 
the nations called Christian to vie with one another in fili- 
bustering expeditions all over the world, regardless of the 
claims of aborigines, while their tens of thousands of priests 
of the religion of love look on approvingly; no such nature 
as that which, in dealing with weaker races, goes beyond 
the primitive rule of life for life, and for one life takes 
many lives; no such nature, I say, can, by any device, be 
framed into a harmonious community. The root of all well- 
ordered social action is a sentiment of justice, which at 

78 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

once insists on personal freedom and is solicitous for the 
like freedom of others; and there at present exists but a 
very inadequate amount of this sentiment. 

Hence the need for further long continuance of a social 
discipline which requires each man to carry on his activities 
with due regard to the like claims of others to carry on 
their activities; and which, while it insists that he shall 
have all the benefits his conduct naturally brings, insists 
also that he shall not saddle on others the evils that his 
conduct naturally brings, unless they freely undertake to 
bear them. And hence the belief that endeavors to elude 
this discipline will not only fail, but will bring worse evils 
than those to be escaped. 

It is not, then, chiefly in the interests of the employing 
classes that socialism is to be resisted, but much more in 
the interests of the employed classes. In one way or other 
production must be regulated; and the regulators, in the 
nature of things, must always be a small class as compared 
with the actual producers. Under voluntary co-operation 
as at present carried on, the regulators, pursuing their per- 
sonal interests, take as large a share of the produce as they 
can get; but, as we are daily shown by trades-union suc- 
cesses, are restrained in the selfish pursuit of their ends. 
Under that compulsory co-operation which socialism would 
necessitate, the regulators, pursuing their personal interests 
with no less selfishness, could not be met by the combined 
resistance of free workers; and their power, unchecked as 
now by refusals to work save on prescribed terms, would 
grow and ramify and consolidate till it became irresistible. 
The ultimate result, as I have before pointed out, must be 
a society like that of ancient Peru, dreadful to contemplate, 
in which the mass of the people, elaborately regimented in 
groups of ten, fifty, one hundred, five hundred, and one 
thousand, ruled by officers of corresponding grades, and tied 
to their districts, were superintended in their private lives 
as well as in their industries, and toiled hopelessly for the 
support of the governmental organization. 

THE SINS OF LEGISLATORS. 

Be it or be it not true that Man is shapen in iniquity and 
conceived in sin, it is unquestionably true that Government 
is begotten of aggression and by aggression. In small unde- 
veloped societies where for ages complete peace has con- 
tinued, there exists nothing like what we call Government : 
no coercive agency, but mere honorary headship, if any head- 
ship at all. In these exceptional communities, unaggressive 
and from special causes unaggressed upon, there is so little 
deviation from the virtues of truthfulness, honesty, justice, 
and generosity, that nothing beyond an occasional expression 
of public opinion by informally-assembled elders is needful.* 
Conversely, we find proofs that, at first recognized but 
temporarily during leadership in war, the authority of a chief 
is permanently established by continuity of war ; and grows 
strong where successful war ends in subjection of neigh- 
bouring tribes. And thence onwards, examples furnished by 
all races put beyond doubt the truth, that the coercive power 
of the chief, developing into king, and king of kings (a 
frequent title in the ancient East), becomes great in propor- 
tion as conquest becomes habitual and the union of subdued 
nations extensive.! Comparisons disclose a further truth 
which should be ever present to us — the truth that the 
aggressiveness of the ruling power inside a society increases 
with its aggressiveness outside the society. As, to make an 

* Political Institutions, §§ 437, 573. 

f Ibid., §§ 471-3. 

80 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

efficient army, the soldiers must be subordinate to their com- 
mander ; so, to make an efficient fighting community, must 
the citizens be subordinate to their government. They must 
furnish recruits to the extent demanded, and yield up what- 
ever property is required. 

An obvious implication is that political ethics, originally 
identical with the ethics of war, must long remain akin to 
them ; and can diverge from them only as warlike activities 
and preparations become less. Current evidence shows this. 
At present on the Continent, the citizen is free only when 
his services as a soldier are not demanded ; and during the 
rest of his life he is largely enslaved in supporting the mili- 
tary organization. Even among ourselves a serious war 
would, by the necessitated conscription, suspend the liberties 
of large numbers and trench on the liberties of the rest, by 
taking from them through taxes whatever supplies were 
needed — that is, forcing them to labour so many days more 
for the State. Inevitably the established code of conduct in 
the dealings of Governments with citizens, must be allied to 
their code of conduct in their dealings with one another. 

I am not, under the title of this article, about to treat of 
the trespasses and the revenges for trespasses, accounts of 
which mainly constitute history ; nor to trace the internal 
inequities which have ever accompanied the external inequi- 
ties. I do not propose here to catalogue the crimes of irre- 
sponsible legislators ; beginning with that of King Khufu, 
the stones of whose vast tomb were laid in the bloody sweat 
of a hundred thousand slaves toiling through long years 
under the lash ; going on to those committed by conquerors, 
Egyptian, Assyrian, Persian, Macedonian, Roman, and the 
rest ; and ending with those of Napoleon, whose ambition to 
set his foot on the neck of the civilized world, cost not less 
than two million lives.* Nor do I propose here to enumerate 
those sins of responsible legislators seen in the long list of 

* Landf rey. See also Study of Sociology, p. 42, and Appendix. 

THE SINS OF LEGISLATOES. 

81 

laws made in the interests of dominant classes — a list coming 
down in our own country to those under which there were 
long maintained slavery and the slave-trade, torturing nearly 
40,000 negroes annually by close packing during a tropical 
voyage, and killing a large percentage of them, and ending 
with the corn-laws, by which, says Sir Erskine May, "to 
ensure high rents, it had been decreed that multitudes should 
hunger." * 

Not, indeed, that a presentation of the conspicuous mis- 
deeds of legislators, responsible and irresponsible, would be 
useless. It would have several uses — one of them relevant 
to the truth above pointed out. Such a presentation would 
make clear how that identity of political ethics with military 
ethics which necessarily exists during primitive times, when 
the army is simply the mobilized society and the society is 
the quiescent army, continues through long stages, and even 
now affects in great degrees our law-proceedings and our 
daily lives. Having, for instance, shown that in numerous 
savage tribes the judicial function of the chief does not exist, 
or is nominal, and that very generally during early stages of 
European civilization, each man had to defend himself and 
rectify his private wrongs as best he might — having shown 
that in mediaeval times the right of private war among 
members of the military order was brought to an end, not 
because the head ruler thought it his duty to arbitrate, but 
because private wars interfered with the efficiency of his 
army in public wars — having shown that the administration 
of justice displayed through subsequent ages a large amount 
of its primitive nature, in trial by battle carried on before the 
king or his deputy as umpire, and which, among ourselves, 
continued nominally to be an alternative form of trial down 
to 1819 ; it might then be pointed out that even now there 
survives trial by battle under another form : counsel being 
the champions and purses the weapons. In civil cases, the 

* Constitutional History of England, ii, p. 617. 

82 

THE MAN VEESUS THE STATE. 

ruling agency cares scarcely more than of old about recti- 
fying the wrongs of the injured ; but, practically, its deputy 
does little less than enforce the rules of the fight : the result 
being less a question of equity than a question of pecuniary 
ability and forensic skill. Nay, so little concern for the 
administration of justice is shown by the ruling agency, that 
wheu, by legal conflict carried on in the presence of its 
deputy, the combatants have been pecuniarily bled even to 
the extent of producing prostration, and when, an appeal 
being made by one of them, the decision is reversed, the 
beaten combatant is made to pay for the blunders of the 
deputy, or of a preceding deputy ; and not unfrequently the 
wronged man, who sought protection or restitution, is taken 
out of court pecuniarily dead. 

Adequately done, such a portrayal of governmental mis- 
deeds of commission and omission, proving that the partially- 
surviving code of ethics arising in, and proper to, a state of 
war, still vitiates governmental action, might greatly moderate 
the hopes of those who are anxious to extend governmental 
control. After observing that along with the still-manifest 
traits of that primitive political structure which chronic 
militancy produces, there goes a still-manifest survival of its 
primitive principles; the reformer and the philanthropist 
might be less sanguine in their anticipations of good from its 
all-pervading agency, and might be more inclined to trust 
agencies of a non-governmental kind. 

But leaving out the greater part of the large topic compre- 
hended under the title of this article, I propose here to deal 
only with a comparatively small remaining part — those sins 
of legislators which are not generated by their personal am- 
bitions or class interests, but result from lack of the study by 
which they are morally bound to prepare themselves. 

A druggist's assistant who, after listening to the descrip- 
tion of pains which he mistakes for those of colic, but which 
are really caused by inflammation of the caecum, prescribes a 

THE SINS OP LEGISLATOES. 

83 

sharp purgative and kills the patient, is found guilty of man- 
slaughter. He is not allowed to excuse himself on the ground 
that he did not intend harm but hoped for good. The plea 
that he simply made a mistake in his diagnosis is not enter- 
tained. He is told that he had no right to risk disastrous 
consequences by meddling in a matter concerning which his 
knowledge was so inadequate. The fact that he was ignorant 
how great was his ignorance is not accepted in bar of judg- 
ment. It is tacitly assumed that the experience common to 
all should have taught him that even the skilled, and much 
more the unskilled, make mistakes in the identification of 
disorders and in the appropriate treatment ; and that having 
disregarded the warning derivable from common experience, 
he was answerable for the consequences. 

"We measure the responsibilities of legislators for mischiefs 
they may do, in a much more lenient fashion. In most 
cases, so far from thinking of them as deserving punishment 
for causing disasters by laws ignorantly enacted, we scarcely 
think of them as deserving reprobation. It is held that 
common experience should have taught the druggist's assist- 
ant, untrained as he is, not to interfere ; but it is not held 
that common experience should have taught the legislator 
not to interfere till he has trained himself. Though multi- 
tudinous facts are before him in the recorded legislation of 
our own country and of other countries, which should impress 
on him the immense evils caused by wrong treatment, he is 
not condemned for disregarding these warnings against rash 
meddling. Contrariwise, it is thought meritorious in him 
when — perhaps lately from college, perhaps fresh from keep- 
ing a pack of hounds which made him popular in his county, 
perhaps emerging from a provincial town where he acquired 
a fortune, perhaps rising from the bar at which he has gained 
a name as an advocate — he enters Parliament; and forth- 
with, in quite a light-hearted way, begins to aid or hinder 
this or that means of operating on the body politic. In this 
case there is no occasion even to make for him the excuse 

84 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

that he does not know how little he knows; for the public at 
large agrees with him in thinking it needless that he should 
know anything more than what the debates on the proposed 
measures tell him. 

And yet the mischiefs wrought by uninstructed law- 
making, enormous in their amount as compared with those 
caused by uninstructed medical treatment, are conspicuous 
to all who do but glance over its history. The reader must 
pardon me while I recall a few familiar instances. Century 
after century, statesmen went on enacting usury laws which 
made worse the condition of the debtor — raising the rate of 
interest "from five to six when intending to reduce it to 
four," * as under Louis XV. ; and indirectly producing un- 
dreamt of evils of many kinds, such as preventing the re- 
productive use of spare capital, and "burdening the small 
proprietors with a multitude of perpetual services."f So 
too, the endeavours which in England continued through five 
hundred years to stop forestalling, and which in France, as 
Arthur Young witnessed, prevented any one from buying 
"more than two bushels of wheat at market,":}: went on 
generation after generation increasing the miseries and 
mortality due to dearth ; for, as everybody now knows, the 
wholesale dealer, who was in the statute " De Pistoribus " 
vituperated as " an open oppressor of poor people," * is 
simply one whose function it is to equalize the supply of 
a commodity by checking unduly rapid consumption. Of 
kindred nature was the measure which, in 1315, to diminish 
the pressure of famine, prescribed the prices of foods, but 
which was hastily repealed after it had caused entire dis- 
appearance of various foods from the markets ; and also such 
measures, more continuously operating, as those which settled 

* W. E. H. Lecky, History of Rationalism, ii, 293-4. 

j De Tocqueville, The State of Society in France before the Revolution 
p. 421. 

X Young's Travels, i. 128-9. 

* G. L. Craik's History of British Commerce, i. 134 

THE SEN'S OF LEGISLATOES. 

85 

by magisterial order " the reasonable gains " of victuallers.* 
Of like spirit and followed by allied mischiefs have been the 
many endeavours to fix wages, which began with the Statute 
of Labourers under Edward III., and ceased only sixty years 
ago ; when, having long galvanized in Spitalfields a decaying 
industry and fostered there a miserable population, Lords 
and Commons finally gave up fixing silk-weavers' earnings 
by the decisions of magistrates. 

Here I imagine an impatient interruption. " "We know all 
that ; the story is stale. The mischiefs of interfering with 
trade bave been dinned in our ears till we are wearv ; and no 
one needs to be taugbt the lesson afresh." My first reply is 
that by the great majority the lesson was never properly 
learnt at all, and that many of those who did learn it have 
forgotten it. For just the same pleas which of old were put 
in for these dictations, are again put in. In tbe statute 35 of 
Edward III., which aimed to keep down the price of herrings 
(but was soon repealed because it raised the price), it was 
complained that people u coming to the fair ... do bargain 
for herring, and every of them, by malice and envy, increase 
upon other, and, if one proffer forty shilling, another will 
proffer ten shillings more, and the third sixty shillings, and 
so every one surmounteth other in the bargain." f And now 
B the higgling of the market," here condemned and ascribed 
"to malice and envy," is being again condemned. The evils 
of competition bave all along been the stock cry of the 
Socialists; and the council of the Democratic Federation 
denounces the carrying on of exchange under B the control of 
individual and greed profit." My second reply is that inter- 
ferences with the law of supply and demand, which a genera- 
tion ago were admitted to be habitually mischievous, are now 
being daily made by Acts of Parliament in new fields ; and 
that, as I shall presently show, they are in these new fields 

* Craik, he. cit., I 136-7. 
f Ibid., 1 137. 

86 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

increasing the evils to be cured and producing fresh ones, as 
of old they did in fields no longer intruded upon. 

Returning from this parenthesis, I go on to explain that 
the above Acts are named to remind the reader that unin- 
6tructed legislators have in past times continually increased 
human suffering in their endeavours to mitigate it; and I 
have now to add that if these evils, shown to be legislatively 
intensified or produced, be multiplied by ten or more, a con- 
ception will be formed of the aggregate evils caused by law- 
making unguided by social science. In a paper read to the 
Statistical Society in May, 1873, Mr. Janson, vice-president 
of the Law Society, stated that from the Statute of Merton 
(20 Henry III.) to the end of 1872, there had been passed 
18,110 public Acts; of which he estimated that four-fifths 
had been wholly or partially repealed. He also stated that 
the number of public Acts repealed wholly or in part, or 
amended, during the three years 1870-71-72 had been 3,532, 
of which 2,759 had been totally repealed. To see whether 
this state of repeal has continued, I have referred to the 
annually-issued volumes of "The Public General Statutes" 
for the last three sessions. Saying nothing of the numerous 
amended Acts, the result is that in the last three sessions 
there have been totally repealed, separately or in groups, 
650 Acts, belonging to the present reign, besides many of pre- 
ceding reigns. This, of course, is greatly above the average 
rate ; for there has of late been an active purgation of the 
statute-book. But making every allowance, we must infer 
that within our own times, repeals have mounted some dis- 
tance into the thousands. Doubtless a number of them have 
been of laws that were obsolete ; others have been demanded 
by changes of circumstances (though seeing how many of 
them are of quite recent Acts, this has not been a large 
cause) ; others simply because they were inoperative ; and 
others have been consequent on the consolidations of numer- 
ous Acts into single Acts. But unquestionably in multi- 
tudinous cases, repeals came because the Acts had proved 

THE SINS OF LEGISLATOES. 

87 

injurious. We talk glibly of such changes — we think of can- 
celled legislation with indifference. We forget that before 
laws are abolished they have generally been inflicting evils 
more or less serious ; some for a few years, some for tens of 
years, some for centuries. Change your vague idea of a bad 
law into a definite idea of it as an agency operating on people's 
lives, and you see that it means so much of pain, so much of 
illness, so much of mortality. A vicious form of legal pro- 
cedure, for example, either enacted or tolerated, entails on 
suitors, costs, or delays, or defeats. What do these imply ? 
Loss of money, often ill-spared ; great and prolonged anxi- 
ety ; frequently consequent bad health ; unhappiness of family 
and dependents ; children stinted in food and clothing — all 
of them miseries which bring after them multiplied remoter 
miseries. Add to which the far more numerous cases of 
those who, lacking the means or the courage to enter on law- 
suits, and therefore submitting to frauds, are impoverished ; 
and have similarly to bear the pains of body and mind which 
ensue. Even to say that a law has been simply a hindrance, 
is to say that it has caused needless loss of time, extra trouble, 
and additional worry ; and among over-burdened people extra 
trouble and worry imply, here and there, physical and men- 
tal prostrations, with their entailed direct and indirect suffer- 
ings. Seeing, then, that bad legislation means injury to men's 
lives, judge what must be the total amount of mental distress, 
physical pain, and raised mortality, which these thousands of 
repealed Acts of Parliament represent ! Fully to bring home 
the truth that law-making unguided by adequate knowledge 
brings enormous evils, let me take an instance which a ques- 
tion of the day recalls. 

Already I have hinted that interferences with the con- 
nexion between supply and demand, given up in certain fields 
after immense mischiefs had been done during many centuries, 
are now taking place in other fields. This connexion is sup- 
posed to hold only where it has been proved to hold by the 

88 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

evils of disregarding it : so feeble is men's belief in it. There 
appears no suspicion that in cases where it seems to fail, 
natural causation has been traversed by artificial hindrances. 
And yet in the case to which I now refer — that of the supply 
of houses for the poor — it needs but to ask what laws have 
been doing for a long time past, to see that the terrible evils 
complained of are mostly law-made. 

A generation ago discussion was taking place concerning 
the inadequacy and badness of industrial dwellings, and I had 
occasion to deal with the question. Here is a passage then 
written : — 

' ' An architect and surveyor describes it [the Building Act] as hav- 
ing worked after the following manner. In those districts of London 
consisting of inferior houses built in that unsubstantial fashion which 
the New Building Act was to mend, there obtains an average rent, 
sufficiently remunerative to landlords whose houses were run up eco- 
nomically before the New Building Act passed. This existing average 
rent fixes the rent that must be charged in these districts for new 
houses of the same accommodation — that is the same number of rooms, 
for the people they are built for do not appreciate the extra safety of 
living within walls strengthened with hoop-iron bond. Now it turns 
out upon trial, that houses built in accordance with the present 
regulations, and let at this established rate, bring in nothing like a 
reasonable return. Builders have consequently confined themselves to 
erecting houses in better districts (where the possibility of a profitable 
competition with pre-existing houses shows that those pre-existing 
houses were tolerably substantial), and have ceased to erect dwellings 
for the masses, except in the suburbs where no pressing sanitary evils 
exist. Meanwhile, in the inferior districts above described, has resulted 
an increase of overcrowding — half-a-dozen families in a house, a score 
lodgers to a room. Nay, more than this has resulted. That state of 
miserable dilapidation into which these abodes of the poor are allowed 
to fall, is due to the absence of competition from new houses. Land- 
lords do not find their tenants tempted away by the offer of better 
accommodation. Repairs, being unnecessary for securing the largest 

amount of profit, are not made In fact for a large percentage 

of the very horrors which our sanitary agitators are trying to cure by 
law, we have to thank previous agitators of the same school I " — Social 
Statia, p. 384 (edition of 1851). 

THE SINS OF LEGISLATOES. 

89 

These were not the only law-made causes of such evils. As 
shown in the following further passage, sundry others were 
recognized : — 

"Writing before the repeal of the brick duty, the Builder says : — 
' It is supposed that one-fourth of the cost of a dwelling which lets for 
2s. Qd. or 3s. a week is caused by the expense of the title-deeds and the 
tax on wood and bricks used in its construction. Of course, the owner 
of such property must be remunerated, and he therefore charges 1\d. 
or 9d. a week to cover these burdens.' Mr. C. Gatliff, secretary to the 
Society for Improving the Dwellings of the Working Classes, describ- 
ing the effect of the window-tax, says : — 'They are now paying upon 
their institution in St. Pancras the sum of £162 16s. in window-duties, 
or 1 per cent, per annum upon the original outlay. The average rental 
paid by the Society's tenants is 5s. Qd. per week, and the window-duty 
deducts from this l\d. per week.'" — Times, January 31, 1850. — Social 
Statics, p. 385 (edition of 1851). 

Neither is this all the evidence which the press of those days 
afforded. There was published in The Times of December 7, 
1850 (too late to be used in the above-named work, which I 
issued in the last week of 1850), a letter dated from the 
Keform Club, and signed " Architect," which contained the 
following passages : — 

"Lord Kinnaird recommends in your paper of yesterday the con- 
struction of model lodging-houses by throwing two or three houses into 
one. 

"Allow me to suggest to his Lordship, and to his friend Lord Ash- 
ley to whom he refers, that if, — 

" 1. The window tax were repealed, 

" 2. The Building Act repealed (excepting the clauses enacting that 

party and external walls shall be fireproof), 
M 3. The timber duties either equalized or repealed, and, 
"4. An Act passed to facilitate the transfer of property, 
"There would be no more necessity for model lodging-houses than 

there is for model ships, model cotton-mills, or model steam-engines. 
"The first limits the poor man's house to seven windows, 
" The second limits the size of the poor man's house to 25 feet by 18 

(about the size of a gentleman's dining-room), into which space the 

builder has to cram a staircase, an entrance passage, a parlour, and a 

kitchen (walls and partitions included). 

90 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

"The third induces the builder to erect the poor man's house of 
timber unfit for building purposes, the duty on the good material (Bal- 
tic) being fifteen times more than the duty on the bad or injurious article 
(Canadian). The Government, even, exclude the latter from all their 
contracts. 

' ' The fourth would have considerable influence upon the present 
miserable state of the dwellings of the poor. Small freeholds might 
then be transferred as easily as leaseholds. The effect of building 
leases has been a direct inducement to bad building." 

To guard against mis-statements or over-statements, I 
have taken the precaution to consult a large East-end builder 
and contractor of forty years' experience, Mr. C. Forrest, 
Museum Works, 17, Victoria Park Square, Bethnal Green, 
who, being chuch warden, member of the vestry, and of the 
board of guardians, adds extensive knowledge of local public 
affairs to his extensive knowledge of the building business. 
Mr. Forrest, who authorizes me to give his name, verifies the 
foregoing statements, with the exception of one which he 
strengthens. He says that " Architect " understates the evil 
entailed by the definition of " a fourth-rate house ; " since the 
dimensions are much less than those he gives (perhaps in 
conformity with the provisions of a more recent Building 
Act). Mr. Forrest has done more than this. Besides illus- 
trating the bad effects of great increase in ground-rents (in 
sixty years from £1 to £8 10s. for a fourth-rate house) 
which, joined with other causes, had obliged him to abandon 
plans for industrial dwellings he had intended to build — 
besides agreeing with " Architect " that this evil has been 
greatly increased by the difficulties of land transfer due to 
the law-established system of trusts and entails ; he pointed 
out that a further penalty on the building of small houses 
is inflicted by additions to local burdens (" prohibitory im- 
posts " he called them) : one of the instances he named 
being that to the cost of each new house has to be added the 
cost of pavement, roadway, and sewerage, which is charged 
according to length of frontage, and which, consequently, 

THE SINS OF LEGISLATOES. 

91 

bears a far larger ratio to the value of a small house than to 
the value of a large one. 

From these law-produced mischiefs, which were great a 
generation ago, and have since been increasing, let us pass to 
more recent law-produced mischiefs. The misery, the disease, 
the mortality, in " rookeries," made continually worse by arti- 
ficial impediments to the increase of fourth-rate houses, and 
by the necessitated greater crowding of those which existed, 
having become a scandal, Government was invoked to remove 
the evil. It responded by Artisans' Dwellings Acts ; giving 
to local authorities powers to pull down bad houses and pro- 
vide for the building of good ones. "What have been the 
results ? A summary of the operations of the Metropolitan 
Board of "Works, dated December 21, 1883, shows that up to 
last September it had, at a cost of a million and a quarter to 
ratepayers, unhoused 21,000 persons and provided houses for 
12,000 — the remaining 9,000 to be hereafter provided for, 
being, meanwhile, left houseless. This is not all. Another 
local lieutenant of the Government, the Commission of Sewers 
for the City, working on the same lines, has, under legislative 
compulsion, pulled down in Golden Lane an^ Petticoat 
Square, masses of condemned small houses, which, together, 
accommodated 1,734 poor people; and of the spaces thus 
cleared five years ago, one has, by State authority, been 
sold for a railway station, and the other is only now being 
covered with industrial dwellings which will eventually 
accommodate one-half of the expelled population : the result 
up to the present time being that, added to those displaced 
by the Metropolitan Board of "Works, these 1,734 displaced 
five years ago, form a total of nearly 11,000 artificially made 
homeless, who have had to find corners for themselves in 
miserable places that were already overflowing ! 

See then what legislation has done. By ill-imposed taxes, 
raising the prices of bricks and timber, it added to the costs 
of houses ; and prompted, for economy's sake, the use of bad 
materials in scanty quantities. To check the consequent 

92 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

production of wretched dwellings, it established regulations 
which, in mediaeval fashion, dictated the quality of the com- 
modity produced : there being no perception that by insisting 
on a higher quality and therefore higher price, it would limit 
the demand and eventually diminish the supply. By addi- 
tional local burdens, legislation has of late still further 
hindered the building of small houses. Finally, having, by 
successive measures, produced first bad houses and then a 
deficiency of better ones, it has at length provided for the 
artificially-increased overflow of poor people by diminishing 
the house-capacity which already could not contain them ! 

Where then lies the blame for the miseries of the East- 
end? Against whom should be raised "The bitter cry of 
outcast London 1 " * 

The German anthropologist Bastian, tells us that a sick 
native of Guinea who causes the fetish to He by not recover- 

* More recently, Glasgow has furnished a gigantic illustration of the 
disasters which result from the socialistic meddlings of municipal bodies. 
The particulars may be found in proceedings of the Glasgow Town Council, 
reported in the Glasgow Herald for September 11, 1891. In the course of 
the debate it was said that the Glasgow Improvement Trust had for years 
been pursuing a " course of blundering," and had landed the corporation 
" in a quagmire." Out of some £2,000,000 taken from the ratepayers to 
buy and clear 88 acres of bad house property, £1,000,000 had been got back 
by sale of cleared lands. But the property remaining in the hands of the 
Corporation, mostly vacant land, has, by successive valuations in 1880, 
1884, and 1891, been shown to have gradually depreciated to the extent of 
£320,000 — an admitted depreciation, believed to be far less than the actual 
depreciation. Moreover, model-blocks built by the Improvement Trust, 
have proved to be not only financial failures, but also failures philanthrop- 
lcally considered. One which cost £10,000, and in the first year yielded 
5 per cent., brought in the second year 4 per cent., and in the third 2£ per 
cent. Another which cost £11,000 yields only 3 per cent. And, as is thus 
implied, these dwellings, instead of being in demand, have a decreasing 
number of tenants — a decreasing number, too, notwithstanding the fact 
that the clearing of so large an area of low-class dwellings has increased 
the pressure of the working population, made the over-crowding greater 
in other parts of the city, and intensified the sanitary evils which were to 

THE SINS OF LEGISLATOES. 

93 

ing is strangled ; * and we may reasonably suppose that among 
the Guinea people, any one audacious enough to call in 
question the power of the fetish would be promptly sacrificed. 
In days when Governmental authority was enforced by 
strong measures, there was a kindred danger in saying any- 
thing disrespectful of the political fetish. Nowadays, how- 
ever, the worst punishment to be looked for by one who 
questions its omnipotence, is that he will be reviled as a 
reactionary who talks laissez-faire. That any facts he may 
bring forward will appreciably decrease the established faith 
is not to be expected ; for we are daily shown that this faith 
is proof against all adverse evidence. Let us contemplate a 
small part of that vast mass of it which passes unheeded. 

" A Government-office is like an inverted filter ; you send 
in accounts clear and they come out muddy." Such was the 

be mitigated. Commenting on the results, as they had become manifest 
at the close of 1888, Mr. Honeyman, President of the Social Economy Sec- 
tion of the Glasgow Philosophical Society, said that the model-building 
put up by the Improvement Trust, was one " which no sane builder would 
dream of imitating, because it would not pay," and that they had " put 
anything like fair competition entirely out of the question : " " driving tho 
ordinary builder from the field." He also pointed out that the building 
regulations and restrictions imposed by the Improvement Trust, tended " to 
keep the land belonging to the Corporation vacant, and hinder the erection 
of dwellings of the humblest class." In like manner, at a meeting of the 
Kyrle Society, the Lord Provost of Glasgow pointed out that when, with 
philanthropic motives, they built houses for the working-people at prices 
which would not pay the ordinary builder, then " immediately the whole of 
those builders who had hitherto supplied the wants of the working classes 
would stop, and philanthropy would require to take the whole burden of 
the provision on itself." 

To achieve all these failures and produce all these evils, many thou- 
sands of hard-working ratepayers, who have difficulty in making both ends 
meet, have been taxed and pinched and distressed. See, then, the enor- 
mous evils that follow in the train of the baseless belief in the unlimited 
power of a majority — the miserable superstition that a body elected by the 
greater number of citizens has the right to take from citizens at large any 
amount of money for any purpose it pleases ! 

* Mensch, iii. p. 225. 

94 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

comparison I heard made many years ago by the late Sir 
Charles Fox, who, in the conduct of his business, had con- 
siderable experience of public departments. That his opinion 
was not a singular one, though his comparison was, all men 
know. Exposures by the press and criticisms in Parliament, 
leave no one in ignorance of the vices of red-tape routine. 
Its delays, perpetually complained of, and which in the time 
of Mr. Fox Maule went to the extent that " the commissions 
of officers in the army " were generally " about two years in 
arrear," is afresh illustrated by the issue of the first volume 
of the detailed census of 1881, more than two years after the 
information was collected. If we seek explanations of such 
delays, we find one origin to be a scarcely credible confusion. 
In the case of the census returns, the Registrar-General tells 
us that " the difficulty consists not merely in the vast multi- 
tude of different areas that have to be taken into account, but 
still more in the bewildering complexity of their boundaries : " 
there being 39,000 administrative areas of 22 different kinds 
which overlap one another — hundreds, parishes, boroughs, 
wards, petty sessional divisions, lieutenancy divisions, urban 
and rural sanitary districts, dioceses, registration districts, &c. 
And then, as Mr. Rathbone, M.P., points out,* these many 
superposed sets of areas with intersecting boundaries, have 
their respective governing bodies with authorities running 
into one another's districts. Does any one ask why for each 
additional administration Parliament has established a fresh 
set of divisions? The reply which suggests itself is — To 
preserve consistency of method. For this organized confu- 
sion corresponds completely with that organized confusion 
which Parliament each year increases by throwing on to the 
heap of its old Acts a hundred new Acts, the provisions of 
which traverse and qualify in all kinds of ways the provisions 
of multitudinous Acts on to which they are thrown : the onus 
of settling what is the law being left to private persons, who 

* The Nineteenth Century, February, 18S3. 

THE SINS OF LEGISLATOES. 

95 

lose their property in getting judges' interpretations. And 
again, this system of putting networks of districts over other 
networks, with their conflicting authorities, is quite con- 
sistent with the method under which the reader of the Pub- 
lic Health Act of 1872, who wishes to know what are the 
powers exercised over him, is referred to 26 preceding Acts 
of several classes and numerous dates.* So, too, with ad- 
ministrative inertia. Continually there occur cases showing 
the resistance of officialism to improvements ; as by the Ad- 
miralty when use of the electric telegraph was proposed, and 
the reply was — " We have a very good semaphore system ; " 
or as by the Post Office, which the late Sir Charles Siemens 
years ago said had obstructed the employment of improved 
methods of telegraphing and which since then has impeded 
the use of the telephone. Other cases akin to the case of 
industrial dwellings, now and then show how the State with 
one hand increases evils which with the other hand it tries to 
diminish ; as when it puts a duty on fire-insurances and then 
makes regulations for the better putting out of fires : dictat- 
ing, too, certain modes of construction which, as Captain 
Shaw shows, entail additional dangers, f Again, the absurdi- 
ties of official routine, rigid where it need not be and lax 
where it should be rigid, occasionally become glaring enough 
to cause scandals ; as when a secret State-document of im- 
portance, put into the hands of an ill-paid copying-clerk who 
was not even in permanent Government employ, was made 
public by him ; or as when the mode of making the Moor- 
som fuse, which was kept secret even from our highest artil- 
lery officers, was taught to them by the Russians, who had 
been allowed to learn it ; or as when a diagram showing the 
" distances at which British and foreign iron-clads could be 

* " The Statistics of Legislation." By P. H. Janson, Esq., F.L.S., Vice- 
president of the Incorporated Law Society. [Read before the Statistical 
Society, May, 1873.] 

t Fire Surveys; or, a Summary of the Principles to be observed in 
Estimating the Bisk of Buildings. 

96 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

perforated by our large guns," communicated by an enter- 
prising attache to his own Government, then became known 
" to all the Governments of Europe," while English officers 
remained ignorant of the facts.* So, too, with State-super- 
vision. Guaranteeing of quality by inspection has been 
shown, in the hall-marking of silver, to be superfluous, while 
the silver trade has been decreased by it;f and in other 
cases it has lowered the quality by establishing a standard 
which it is useless to exceed : instance the case of the Cork 
butter-market, where the higher kinds are disadvantaged 
in not adequately profiting by their better repute ; % or, in- 
stance the case of herring-branding (now optional), the effect 
of which is to put the many inferior curers who just reach 
the level of official approval, on a par with the few better 
ones who rise above it, and so to discourage these. But such 
lessons pass unlearned. Even where the failure of inspection 
is most glaring, no notice is taken of it ; as instance the ter- 
rible catastrophe by which a train full of people was de- 
stroyed along with the Tay bridge. Countless denunciations, 
loud and unsparing, were vented against engineer and con- 
tractor ; but little, if anything, was said about the Govern- 
ment officer from whom the bridge received State-approval. 
So, too, with prevention of disease. It matters not that 
under the management or dictation of State-agents some of 
the worst evils occur ; as when the lives of 87 wives and chil- 
dren of soldiers are sacrificed in the ship Accrington j * or 
as when typhoid fever and diphtheria are diffused by a State- 
ordered drainage system, as in Edinburgh ; || or as when 

* See The Times, October 6, 1874, where other instances are given, 
f Sir Thomas Farrer, The State in its Relation to Trade, p. 147. 

\ Ibid., p. 149. 

* Hansard, vol. clvi. p. 718, and vol. clviii. p. 4464. 

|| Letter of an Edinburgh M.D. in The Times of 17th January, 1876, veri- 
fying other testimonies ; one of which I had previously cited concerning 
Windsor, where, as in Edinburgh, there was absolutely no typhoid in the 
undrained parts, while it was very fatal in the drained parts. — Study of 
Sociology, chap. L, notes. 

THE SINS OF LEGISLATORS. 

97 

officially-enforced sanitary appliances, ever getting out of 
order, increase the evils they were to decrease.* Masses of 
such evidence leave unabated the confidence with which sani- 
tary inspection is invoked — invoked, indeed, more than ever ; 
as is shown in the recent suggestion that all public schools 
should be under the supervision of health-officers. Nay, even 
when the State has manifestly caused the mischief complained 
of, faith in its beneficent agency is not at all diminished ; as 
we see in the fact that, having a generation ago authorized, 
or rather required, towns to establish drainage systems which 
delivered sewage into the rivers, and having thus polluted 
the sources of water-supply, an outcry was raised against the 
water-companies for the impurities of their water — an outcry 
which continued after these towns had been compelled, at 
vast extra cost, to revolutionize their drainage systems. And 
now, as the only remedy, there follows the demand that the 
State, by its local proxies, shall undertake the whole business. 
The State's misdoings become, as in the case of industrial 
dwellings, reasons for praying it to do more ! 

This worship of the legislature is, in one respect, indeed, 
less excusable than the fetish-worship to which I have tacitly 
compared it. The savage has the defence that his fetish is 
silent — does not confess its inability. But the civilized man 
persists in ascribing to this idol made with his own hands, 
powers which in one way or other it confesses it has not got. 
I do not mean merely that the debates daily tell us of legis- 
lative measures which have done ^vil instead of good ; nor 
do I mean merely that the thousands of Acts of Parliament 
which repeal preceding Acts, are so many tacit admissions of 
failure. Neither do I refer only to such quasi-governmental 
confessions as that contained in the report of the Poor Law 
Commissioners, who said that — " We find, on the one hand, 

* I say this partly from personal knowledge ; having now before me 
memoranda made 25 years ago concerning such results produced under my 
own observation. Verifying facts have recently been given by Sir Richard 
Cross in the Nineteenth Century for January, 1884, p. 155. 

98 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

that there is scarcely one statute connected with the adminis- 
tration of public relief which has produced the effect de- 
signed by the legislature, and that the majority of them have 
created new evils, and aggravated those which they were in- 
tended to prevent." * I refer rather to confessions made by 
statesmen and by State departments. Here, for example, in 
a memorial addressed to Mr. Gladstone, and adopted by a 
highly-influential meeting held under the chairmanship of the 
late Lord Lyttelton, I read : — 

"We, the undersigned, Peers, Members of the House of Commons, 
Ratepayers, and Inhabitants of the Metropolis, feeling strongly the 
truth and force of your statement made in the House of Commons, in 
1866, that, ' there is still a lamentable and deplorable state of our whole 
arrangements with regard to public works — vacillation, uncertainty, 
costliness, extravagance, meanness, and all the conflicting vices that 
could be enumerated, are united in our present system,' " &c, &c.f 

Here, again, is an example furnished by a recent minute of 
the Board of Trade (November, 1883), in which it is said that 
since " the Shipwreck Committee of 1836 scarcely a session 
has passed without some Act being passed or some step be- 
ing taken by the legislature or the Government with this ob- 
ject " [prevention of shipwrecks] ; and that " the multiplicity 
of statutes, which were all consolidated into one Act in 1854, 
has again become a scandal and a reproach : " each measure 
being passed because previous ones had failed. And then 
comes presently the confession that " the loss of life and of 
ships has been greater since 1876 than it ever was before." 
Meanwhile, the cost of administration has been raised from 
£17,000 a year to £73,000 a year. 

* Sir G. Nicholl's History of the English Poor Law, ii. p. 252. 
f See The Times, March 31, 1873. 

\ In these paragraphs are contained just a few additional examples. 
Numbers which I have before given in books and essays, will be found in 
Social Statics (1851) ; " Over-Legislation " (1853) ; " Representative Govern- 
ment" (1857); "Specialized Administration" (1871); Study of Sociology 
(1873), and Postscript to ditto (1880) ; besides cases in smaller essays. 

THE SINS OF LEGISLATORS. 

99 

It is surprising how, spite of better knowledge, the imagi- 
nation is excited by artificial appliances used in particular 
ways. We see it all through human history, from the war- 
paint with which the savage frightens his adversary, down 
through religious ceremonies and regal processions, to the 
robes of a Speaker and the wand of an officially-dressed 
usher. I remember a child who, able to look with tolerable 
composure on a horrible cadaverous mask while it was held 
in the hand, ran away shrieking when his father put it on. A 
kindred change of feeling comes over constituencies when, 
from boroughs and counties, their members pass to the Legis- 
lative Chamber. While before them as candidates, they are, 
by one or other party, jeered at, lampooned, " heckled," and 
in all ways treated with utter disrespect. But as soon as they 
assemble at Westminster, those against whom taunts and 
invectives, charges of incompetence and folly, had been 
showered from press and platform, excite unlimited faith. 
Judging from the prayers made to them, there is nothing 
which their wisdom and their power cannot compass. 

The reply to all this will doubtless be that nothing better 
than guidance by " collective wisdom " can be had — that the 
select men of the nation, led by a re-selected few, bring their 
best powers, enlightened by all the knowledge of the time, 
to bear on the matters before them. " What more would 
you have ? " will be the question asked by most. 

My answer is that this best knowledge of the time with 
which legislators are said to come prepared for their duties is 
a knowledge of which the greater part is obviously irrelevant, 
and that they are blameworthy for not seeing what is the 
relevant knowledge. No amount of the linguistic acquire- 
ments by which many of them are distinguished will help 
their judgments in the least ; nor will they be appreciably 
helped by the literatures these acquirements open to them. 
Political experiences and speculations coming from small 
ancient societies, through philosophers who assume that war 

100 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

is the normal state, that slavery is alike needful and just, 
and that women must remain in perpetual tutelage, can yield 
them but small aid in judging how Acts of Parliament will 
work in great nations of modern types. They may ponder 
on the doings of all the great men by whom, according to the 
Carlylean theory, society is framed, and they may spend years 
over those accounts of international conflicts, and treacheries, 
and intrigues, and treaties, which fill historical works, with- 
out being much nearer understanding the how and the why 
of social structures and actions, and the ways in which laws 
affect them. Nor does such information as is picked up at 
the factory, on 'Change, or in the justice room, go far towards 
the required preparation. 

That which is really needed is a systematic study of 
natural causation as displayed among human beings socially 
aggregated. Though a distinct consciousness of causation is 
the last trait which intellectual progress brings — though with 
the savage even a simple mechanical cause is not conceived 
as such — though even among the Greeks the flight of a spear 
was thought of as guided by a god — though from their times 
down almost to our own, epidemics have been habitually 
regarded as of supernatural origin — and though among social 
phenomena, the most complex of all, causal relations may be 
expected to continue longest unrecognized ; yet in our days, 
the existence of such causal relations has become clear enough 
to force on all who think, the inference that before meddhng 
with them they should be diligently studied. The mere 
facts, now familiar, that there is a connexion between the 
number of marriages and the price of corn, and that in the 
same society during the same generation, the ratio of crime 
to population varies within narrow limits, should be sufficient 
to make all see that human desires, using as guide such intel- 
lect as is joined with them, act with approximate uniformity. 
It should be inferred that among social causes, those initiated 
by legislation, similarly operating with an average regularity, 
must not only change men's actions, but, by consequence, 

THE SINS OF LEGISLATOES. 

101 

change their natures — probably in ways not intended. There 
should be recognition of the fact that social causation, more 
than all other causation, is a fructifying causation ; and it 
should be seen that indirect and remote effects are no less 
inevitable than proximate effects. I do not mean that there 
is denial of these statements and inferences. But there are 
beliefs and beliefs — some which are held nominally, some 
which influence conduct in small degrees, some which sway 
it irresistibly under all circumstances ; and unhappily the 
beliefs of law-makers respecting causation in social affairs, 
are of the superficial sort. Let us look at some of the truths 
which all tacitly admit, but which scarcely any take account 
of in legislation. 

There is the indisputable fact that each human being is in 
a certain degree modifiable, both physically and mentally. 
Every theory of education, every discipline, from that of the 
arithmetician to that of the prize-fighter, every proposed 
reward for virtue or punishment for vice, implies the belief, 
embodied in sundry proverbs, that the use or disuse of each 
faculty, bodily or mental, is followed by an adaptive change 
in it — loss of power or gain of power, according to demand. 

There is the fact, also in its broader manifestations uni- 
versally recognized, that modifications of structure, in one 
way or other produced, are inheritable. No one denies that 
by the accumulation of small changes, generation after gen- 
eration, constitution fits itself to conditions ; so that a climate 
which is fatal to other races is innocuous to the adapted race. 
No one denies that peoples who belong to the same original 
stock, but have spread into different habitats where they 
have led different lives, have acquired in course of time 
different aptitudes and different tendencies. No one denies 
that under new conditions new national characters are even 
now being moulded ; as witness the Americans. And if 
adaptation is everywhere and always going on, then adaptive 
modifications must be set up by every change of social con- 
ditions. 

102 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

To which there comes the undeniable corollary that every 
law which serves to alter men's modes of action — compelling, 
or restraining, or aiding, in new ways — so affects them as to 
cause, in course of time, fresh adjustments of their natures. 
Beyond any immediate effect wrought, there is the remote 
effect, wholly ignored by most — a re-moulding of the average 
character : a re-moulding which may be of a desirable kind 
or of an undesirable kind, but which in any case is the most 
important of the results to be considered. 

Other general truths which the citizen, and still more the 
legislator, ought to contemplate until they become wrought 
into his intellectual fabric, are disclosed when we ask how 
social activities are produced ; and when we recognize the 
obvious answer that they are the aggregate results of the 
desires of individuals who are severally seeking satisfactions, 
and ordinarily pursuing the ways which, with their pre- 
existing habits and thoughts, seem the easiest — following the 
lines of least resistance : the truths of political economy 
being so many sequences. It needs no proving that social 
structures and social actions must in some way or other be 
the outcome of human emotions guided by ideas — either those 
of ancestors or those of living men. And that the right in- 
terpretation of social phenomena is to be found in the 
co-operation of these factors from generation to generation, 
follows inevitably. 

Such an interpretation soon brings us to the inference 
that among men's desires seeking gratifications, those which 
have prompted their private activities and their spontaneous 
co-operations, have done much more towards social develop- 
ment than those which have worked through governmental 
agencies. That abundant crops now grow where once only 
wild berries could be gathered, is due to the pursuit of indi- 
vidual satisfactions through many centuries. The progress 
from wigwams to good houses has resulted from wishes to 
increase personal welfare ; and towns have arisen under the 
like promptings. Beginning with traffic at gatherings on 

THE SINS OF LEGISLATOES. 

103 

occasions of religious festivals, the trading organization, now 
so extensive and complex, has been produced entirely by 
men's efforts to achieve their private ends. Perpetually, 
governments have thwarted and deranged the growth, but 
have in no way furthered it ; save by partially discharging 
their proper function and maintaining social order. So, too, 
with those advances of knowledge and those improvements 
of appliances, by which these structural changes and these 
increasing activities have been made possible. It is not to 
the State that we owe the multitudinous useful inventions 
from the spade to the telephone ; it was not the State which 
made possible extended navigation by a developed astron- 
omy ; it was not the State which made the discoveries in 
physics, chemistry, and the rest, which guide modern manu- 
facturers ; it was not the State which devised the machinery 
for producing fabrics of every kind, for transferring men 
and things from place to place, and for ministering in a thou- 
sand ways to our comforts. The world-wide transactions 
conducted in merchants' offices, the rush of traffic filling our 
streets, the retail distributing system which brings everything 
within easy reach and delivers the necessaries of life daily at 
our doors, are not of governmental origin. All these are 
results of the spontaneous activities of citizens, separate or 
grouped. Nay, to these spontaneous activities governments 
owe the very means of performing their duties. Divest the 
political machinery of all those aids which Science and Art 
have yielded it — leave it with those only which State-officials 
have invented ; and its functions would cease. The very 
language in which its laws are registered and the orders of 
its agents daily given, is an instrument not in the remotest 
degree due to the legislator ; but is one which has unawares 
grown up during men's intercourse while pursuing their per- 
sonal satisfactions. 

And then a truth to which the foregoing one introduces 
us, is that this spontaneously-formed social organization is so 
bound together that you cannot act on one part without 

104 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

acting more or less on all parts. "We see this unmistakably 
when a cotton-famine, first paralyzing certain manufacturing 
districts and then affecting the doings of wholesale and retail 
distributors throughout the kingdom, as well as the people 
they supply, goes on to affect the makers and distributors, as 
well as the wearers, of other fabrics — woollen, linen, &c. Or 
we see it when a rise in the price of coal, besides influencing 
domestic life everywhere, hinders many of our industries, 
raises the prices of the commodities produced, alters the 
consumption of them, and changes the habits of consumers. 
What we see clearly in these marked cases happens in every 
case, in sensible or in insensible ways. And manifestly, Acts 
of Parliament are among those factors which, beyond the 
effects directly produced, have countless other effects of mul- 
titudinous kinds. As I heard remarked by a distinguished 
professor, whose studies give ample means of judging — 
"When once you begin to interfere "with the order of 
Nature there is no knowing where the results will end." 
And if this is true of that sub-human order of Nature 
to which he referred, still more is it true of that order 
of Nature existing in the social arrangements of human 
beings. 

And now to carry home the conclusion that the legislator 
should bring to his business a vivid consciousness of these 
and other such broad truths concerning the society with 
which he proposes to deal, let me present somewhat more 
fully one of them not yet mentioned. 

The continuance of every higher species of creature de- 
pends on conformity, now to one, now to the other, of two 
radically-opposed principles. The early lives of its members, 
and the adult lives of its members, have to be dealt with in 
contrary ways. We will contemplate them in their natural 
order. 

One of the most familiar facts is that animals of superior 
types, comparatively slow in reaching maturity, are enabled 

THE SINS OF LEGISLATOES. 

105 

when they have reached it, to give more aid to their off- 
spring than animals of inferior types. The adults foster 
their young during periods more or less prolonged, while 
yet the young are unable to provide for themselves ; and it 
is obvious that maintenance of the species can be secured 
only by this parental care. It requires no proving that the 
blind unfledged hedge-bird, or the young puppy even after 
it has acquired sight, would forthwith die if it had to keep 
itself warm and obtain its own food. The gratuitous aid 
must be great in proportion as the young one is of little 
worth, either to itself or to others ; and it may diminish as 
fast as, by increasing development, the young one acquires 
worth, at first for self-sustentation, and by-and-by for susten- 
tation of others. That is to say, during immaturity, benefits 
received must vary inversely as the power or ability of the 
receiver. Clearly if during this first part of life benefits 
were proportioned to merits, or rewards to deserts, the 
species would disappear in a generation. 

From this regime of the family-group, let us turn to the 
regime of that larger group formed by adult members of 
the species. Asks what happens when the new individual, 
acquiring complete use of its powers and ceasing to have 
parental aid, is left to itself. Now there comes into play a 
principle just the reverse to that above described. Through- 
out the rest of its life, each adult gets benefit in proportion 
to merit — reward in proportion to desert : merit and desert 
in each case being understood as ability to fulfil all the 
requirements of life — to get food, to find shelter, to escape 
enemies. Placed in competition with members of its own 
species and in antagonism with members of other species, it 
dwindles and gets killed off, or thrives and propagates, 
according as it is ill-endowed or well-endowed. Manifestly 
an opposite regime, could it be maintained, would, in course 
of time, be fatal. If the benefits received by each individual 
were proportionate to its inferiority — if, as a consequence, 
multiplication of the inferior was furthered, and multiplica- 

106 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

tion of the superior hindered, progressive degradation would 
result ; and eventually the degenerate species would fail to 
hold its ground in presence of antagonistic species and com- 
peting species. 

The broad fact then, here to be noted, is that Nature's 
modes of treatment inside the family-group and outside the 
family-group are diametrically opposed to one another ; and 
that the intrusion of either mode into the 6phere of the 
other, would be destructive either immediately or re- 
motely. 

Does any one think that the like does not hold of the 
human species? He cannot deny that within the human 
family, as within any inferior family, it would be fatal to 
proportion benefits to merits. Can he assert that outside the 
family, among adults, there should not be, as throughout the 
animal world, a proportioning of benefits to merits ? Will he 
contend that no mischief will result if the lowly endowed are 
enabled to thrive and multiply as much as, or more than, the 
highly endowed ? A society of men, standing towards other 
societies in relations of either antagonism or competition, 
may be considered as a species, or, more literally, as a variety 
of a species ; and it must be true of it as of other species or 
varieties, that it will be unable to hold its own in the struggle 
with other societies, if it disadvantages its superior units that 
it may advantage its inferior units. Surely none can fail to 
see that were the principle of family life to be adopted and 
fully carried out in social life — were reward always great in 
proportion as desert was small, fatal results to the society 
would quickly follow ; and if so, then even a partial intrusion 
of the family regime into the regime of the State, will be 
slowly followed by fatal results. Society in its corporate ca- 
pacity, cannot without immediate or remoter disaster in- 
terfere with the play of these opposed principles under 
which every 6pecies has reached such fitness for its mode 
of fife as it possesses, and under which it maintains that 
fitness. 

THE SINS OF LEGISLATOES. 

107 

I say advisedly — society in its corporate capacity; not 
intending to exclude or condemn aid given to the inferior by 
the superior in their individual capacities. Though when 
given so indiscriminately as to enable the inferior to multi- 
ply, such aid entails mischief; yet in the absence of aid 
given by society, individual aid, more generally demanded 
than now, and associated with a greater sense of responsi- 
bility, would, on the average, be given with the effect of 
fostering the unfortunate worthy rather than the innately 
unworthy: there being always, too, the concomitant social 
benefit arising from culture of the sympathies. But all this 
may be admitted while asserting that the radical distinction 
between family-ethics and State-ethics must be maintained ; 
and that while generosity must be the essential principle of 
the one, justice must be the essential principle of the other — 
a rigorous maintenance of those normal relations among 
citizens under which each gets in return for his labour, 
skilled or unskilled, bodily or mental, as much as is proved 
to be its value by the demand for it : such return, therefore, 
as will enable him to thrive and rear offspring in proportion 
to the superiorities which make him valuable to himself and 
others. 

And yet, notwithstanding the conspicuousness of these 
truths, which should strike everyone who leaves his lexicons, 
and his law-deeds, and his ledgers, and looks abroad into that 
natural order of things under which we exist, and to which 
we must conform, there is continual advocacy of paternal 
government. The intrusion of family-ethics into the ethics 
of the State, instead of being regarded as socially injurious, 
is more and more demanded as the only efficient means to 
social benefit. So far has this delusion now gone, that it 
vitiates the beliefs of those who might, more than all others, 
be thought safe from it. In the essay to which the Cobden 
Club awarded its prize in 1880, there occurs the assertion 
that " the truth of Free Trade is clouded over by the laissez- 
faire fallacy ; " and we are told that " we need a great deal 

108 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

more parental government — that bugbear of the old econo- 
mists." * 

"Vitally important as is the truth above insisted upon, 
6ince acceptance or rejection of it affects the entire fabric of 
political conclusions formed, I may be excused if I emphasize 
it by here quoting certain passages contained in a work I 
published in 1851 : premising, only, that the reader must 
not hold me committed to such teleological implications as 
they contain. After describing " that state of universal war- 
fare maintained throughout the lower creation," and showing 
that an average of benefit results from it, I have continued 
thus : — 

M Note further, that their carnivorous enemies not only remove from 
herbivorous herds individuals past their prime, but also weed out the 
sickly, the malformed, and the least fleet or powerful. By the aid of 
which purifying process, as well as by the fighting so universal in the 
pairing season, all vitiation of the race through the multiplication of 
its inferior samples is prevented ; and the maintenance of a constitu- 
tion completely adapted to surrounding conditions, and therefore most 
productive of happiness, is ensured. 

"The development of the higher creation is a progress towards a 
form of being capable of a happiness undiminished by these drawbacks. 
It is in the human race that the consummation is to be accomplished. 
Civilization is the last stage of its accomplishment. And the ideal 
man is the man in whom all the conditions of that accomplishment are 
fulfilled. Meanwhile, the well-being of existing humanity, and the 
unfolding of it into this ultimate perfection, are both secured by that 
Bame beneficent, though severe discipline, to which the animate crea- 
tion at large is subject : a discipline which is pitiless in the working 
out of good : a felicity -pursuing law which never swerves for the avoid- 
ance of partial and temporary suffering. The poverty of the incapable, 
the distresses that come upon the imprudent, the starvation of the idle, 
and those shoulderings aside of the weak by the strong, which leave so 
many ' in shallows and in miseries,' are the decrees of a large, far-seeing 
benevolence." 

******* 

"To become fit for the social state, man has not only to lose his savage- 

* On the Value of Political Economy to Mankind. By A. N. Cumming, 
pp. 47, 48. 

THE SINS OF LEGISLATOES. 

109 

ness, but he has to acquire the capacities needful for civilized life. 
Power of application must be developed; such modification of the 
intellect as shall qualify it for its new tasks must take place; and, 
above all, there must be gained the ability to sacrifice a small imme- 
diate gratification for a future great one. The state of transition will 
of course be an unhappy state. Misery inevitably results from incon- 
gruity between constitution and conditions. All these evils which 
afflict us, and seem to the uninitiated the obvious consequences of this 
or that removable cause, are unavoidable attendants on the adaptation 
now in progress. Humanity is being pressed against the inexorable 
necessities of its new position— is being moulded into harmony with 
them, and has to bear the resulting unhappiness as best it can. The 
process must be undergone, and the sufferings must be endured. No 
power on earth, no cunningly-devised laws of statesmen, no world- 
rectifying schemes of the humane, no communist panaceas, no reforms 
chat men ever did broach or ever will broach, can diminish them one 
■(ot. Intensified they may be, and are; and in preventing their inten- 
sification, the philanthropic will find ample scope for exertion. But 
there is bound up with the change a normal amount of suffering, which 
cannot be lessened without altering the very laws of life." 

******* 

" Of course, in so far as the severity of this process is mitigated by 
the spontaneous sympathy of men for each other, it is proper that it 
should be mitigated ; albeit there is unquestionably harm done when 
sympathy is shown, without any regard to ultimate results. But the 
drawbacks hence arising are nothing like commensurate with the bene- 
fits otherwise conferred. Only when this sympathy prompts to a breach 
of equity — only when it originates an interference forbidden by the law 
of equal freedom — only when, by so doing, it suspends in some particu- 
lar department of life the relationship between constitution and con- 
ditions, does it work pure evil. Then, however, it defeats its own 
end. Instead of diminishing suffering, it eventually increases it. It 
favors the multiplication of those worst fitted for existence, and, by 
consequence, hinders the multipbcation of those best fitted for exist- 
ence— leaving, as it does, less room for them. It tends to fill the 
world with those to whom life will bring most pain, and tends to keep 
out of it those to whom life will bring most pleasure. It inflicts posi- 
tive misery, and prevents positive happiness." — Social Statics, pp. 322-5 
and pp. 380-1 (edition of 1851). 

The lapse of a third of a century since these passages were 
published, has brought me no reason for retreating from the 

110 

THE MAN VEESUS THE STATE. 

position taken up in them. Contrariwise, it has brought a 
vast amount of evidence strengthening that position. The 
beneficial results of the survival of the fittest, prove to be 
immeasurably greater than those above indicated. The 
process of "natural selection," as Mr. Darwin called it, 
co-operating with a tendency to variation and to inheritance 
of variations, he has shown to be a chief cause (though not, 
I believe, the sole cause) of that evolution through which all 
living things, beginning with the lowest and diverging and 
re-diverging as they evolved, have reached their present 
degrees of organization and adaptation to their modes of life. 
So familiar has this truth become that some apology seems 
needed for naming it. And yet, strange to say, now that 
this truth is recognized by most cultivated people — now that 
the beneficent working of the survival of the fittest has been 
so impressed on them that, much more than people in past 
times, they might be expected to hesitate before neutralizing 
its action — now more than ever before in the history of the 
world, are they doing all they can to further survival of the 
unfittest ! 

But the postulate that men are rational beings, continually 
leads one to draw inferences which prove to be extremely 
wide of the mark.* 

" Yes truly ; your principle is derived from the lives of 
brutes, and is a brutal principle. You will not persuade me 

* The saying of Emerson that most people can understand a principle 
only when its light falls on a fact, induces me here to cite a fact which 
may carry home the above principle to those on whom, in its abstract form, 
it will produce no effect. It rarely happens that the amount of evil caused 
by fostering the vicious and good-for-nothing can be estimated. But in 
America, at a meeting of the States Charities Aid Association, held on 
December 18, 1874, a startling instance was given in detail by Dr. Harris, 
It was furnished by a county on the Upper Hudson, remarkable for the 
ratio of crime and poverty to population. Generations ago there had ex- 
isted a certain "gutter-child," as she would be here called, known as 
" Margaret," who proved to be the prolific mother of a prolific race. Be- 

THE SINS OF LEGISLATOES. 

Ill 

that men are to be under the discipline which animals are 
under. I care nothing for your natural-history arguments. 
My conscience shows me that the feeble and the suffering 
must be helped ; and if selfish people won't help them, they 
must be forced by law to help them. Don't tell me that the 
milk of human kindness is to be reserved for the relations 
between individuals, and that Governments must be the 
administrators of nothing but hard justice. Every man with 
sympathy in him must feel that hunger and pain and squalor 
must be prevented ; and that if private agencies do not suf- 
fice, then public agencies must be established." 

Such is the kind of response which I expect to be made by 
nine out of ten. In some of them it will doubtless result 
from a fellow-feeling so acute that they cannot contemplate 
human misery without an impatience which excludes all 
thought of remote results. Concerning the susceptibilities of 
the rest, we may, however, be somewhat sceptical. Persons 
who are angry if, to maintain our supposed national " in- 
terests" or national " prestige,^ those in authority do not send 
out thousands of men to be partially destroyed while destroy- 
ing other thousands of men because we suspect their inten- 
tions, or dislike their institutions, or want their territory, 
cannot after all be so tender in feeling that contemplating 
the hardships of the poor is intolerable to them. Little 
admiration need be felt for the professed sympathies of peo- 
ple who urge on a policy which breaks up progressing socie- 
ties ; and who then look on with cynical indifference at the 
weltering confusion left behind, with all its entailed suffering 
and death. Those who, when Boers, asserting their independ- 

sides great numbers of idiots, imbeciles, drunkards, lunatics, paupers, and 
prostitutes, " the county records show two hundred of her descendants who 
have been criminals." Was it kindness or cruelty which, generation after 
generation, enabled these to multiply and become an increasing curse to 
the society around them t [For particulars see The Jukes : a Study in 
Crime, Pauperism, Disease and Heredity. By R. L. Dugdale. New York : 
Putnams.] 

112 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

ence, successfully resisted us, were angry because British 
" honour " was not maintained by fighting to avenge a defeat, 
at the cost of more mortality and misery to our own soldiers 
and their antagonists, cannot have so much " enthusiasm of 
humanity" as protests like that indicated above would lead 
one to expect. Indeed, along with this sensitiveness which it 
seems will not let them look with patience on the pains of 
" the battle of life " as it quietly goes on around, they appear 
to have a callousness which not only tolerates but enjoys 
contemplating the pains of battles of the literal kind ; as one 
sees in the demand for illustrated papers containing scenes of 
carnage, and in the greediness with which detailed accounts 
of bloody engagements are read. We may reasonably have 
our doubts about men whose feelings are such that they can- 
not bear the thought of hardships borne, mostly by the idle 
and the improvident, and who, nevertheless, have demanded 
thirty-one editions of The Fifteen Decisive Battles of the 
World, in which they may revel in accounts of slaughter. 
Nay, even still more remarkable is the contrast between the 
professed tender-heartedness and the actual hard-heartedness 
of those who would reverse the normal course of things that 
immediate miseries may be prevented, even at the cost of 
greater miseries hereafter produced. For on other occasions 
you may hear them, with utter disregard of bloodshed and 
death, contend that in the interests of humanity at large, it is 
well that the inferior races should be exterminated and their 
places occupied by the superior races. So that, marvellous 
to relate, though they cannot bear to think of the evils 
accompanying the struggle for existence as it is carried on 
without violence among individuals in their own society, they 
contemplate with equanimity such evils in their intense and 
wholesale forms, when inflicted by fire and sword on entire 
communities. Not worthy of much respect then, as it seems 
to me, is this generous consideration of the inferior at home 
which is accompanied by unscrupulous sacrifice of the in- 
ferior abroad. 

THE SINS OF LEGISLATOBS. 

113 

Still less respectable appears this extreme concern for 
those of our own blood which goes along with utter un- 
concern for those of other blood, when we observe its 
methods. Did it prompt personal effort to relieve the 
suffering, it would rightly receive approving recognition. 
Were the many who express this cheap pity like the few 
who devote large parts of their time to aiding and encourag- 
ing, and occasionally amusing, those who, by ill-fortune or 
incapacity, are brought to lives of hardship, they would be 
worthy of unqualified admiration. The more there are of 
men and women who help the poor to help themselves — the 
more there are of those whose sympathy is exhibited directly 
and not by proxy, the more we may rejoice. But the 
immense majority of the persons who wish to mitigate by 
law the miseries of the unsuccessful and the reckless, pro- 
pose to do this in small measure at their own cost and 
mainly at the cost of others — sometimes with their assent 
but mostly without. More than this is true ; for those who 
are to be forced to do so much for the distressed, often 
equally or more require something doing for them. The 
deserving poor are among those who are taxed to support the 
undeserving poor. As, under the old Poor Law, the diligent 
and provident labourer had to pay that the good-for-nothings 
might not suffer, until frequently under this extra burden 
he broke down and himself took refuge in the workhouse — 
as, at present, the total rates levied in large towns for all pub- 
he purposes, have reached such a height that they " cannot 
be exceeded without inflicting great hardship on the small 
shop-keepers and artisans, who already find it difficult enough 
to keep themselves free from the pauper taint ; " * so in all 
cases, the policy is one which intensifies the pains of those 
most deserving of pity, that the pains of those least deserving 
of pity may be mitigated. Men who are so sympathetic that 
they cannot let the struggle for existence bring on the un- 

* Mr. J. Chamberlain in Fortnightly Review, December, 1883, p. 772. 

114 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

worthy the sufferings consequent on their incapacity or mis- 
conduct, are so unsympathetic that they can, deliberately, make 
the struggle for existence harder for the worthy, and inflict 
on them and their children artificial evils in addition to 
the natural evils they have to bear ! 

And here we are brought round to our original topic — the 
sins of legislators. Here there comes clearly before us the 
commonest of the transgressions which rulers commit — a 
transgression so common, and so sanctified by custom, that 
no one imagines it to be a transgression. Here we see that, 
as indicated at the outset, Government, begotten of aggression 
and by aggression, ever continues to betray its original nature 
by its aggressiveness ; and that even what on its nearer face 
seems beneficence only, shows, on its remoter face, not a little 
maleficence — kindness at the cost of cruelty. For is it not 
cruel to increase the sufferings of the better that the sufferings 
of the worse may be decreased ? 

It is, indeed, marvellous how readily we let ourselves be 
deceived by words and phrases which suggest one aspect of 
the facts while leaving the opposite aspect unsuggested. A 
good illustration of this, and one germane to the immediate 
question, is seen in the use of the words " protection " and 
" protectionist " by the antagonists of free-trade, and in the 
tacit admission of its propriety by free-traders. While the 
one party has habitually ignored, the other party has 
habitually failed to enphasize, the truth that this so-called 
protection always involves aggression ; and that the name 
aggressionist ought to be substituted for the name pro- 
tectionist. For nothing can be more certain than that if, to 
maintain A's profit, B is forbidden to buy of C, or is fined to 
the extent of the duty if he buys of C, then B is aggressed 
upon that A may be " protected." Nay, " aggressionists " is 
a title doubly more applicable to the anti-free-traders than is 
the euphemistic title " protectionists ; " since, that one pro- 
ducer may gain, ten consumers are fleeced. 

THE SINS OF LEGISLATOES. 

115 

Now just the like confusion of ideas, caused by looking 
at one face only of the transaction, may be traced throughout 
all the legislation which forcibly takes the property of this 
man for the purpose of giving gratis benefits to that man. 
Habitually when one of the numerous measures thus charac- 
terized is discussed, the dominant thought is concerning the 
pitiable Jones who is to be protected against some evil ; 
while no thought is given to the hard-working Brown who 
is aggressed upon, often much more to be pitied. Money 
is exacted (either directly or through raised rent) from the 
huckster who only by extreme pinching can pay her way, 
from the mason thrown out of work by a strike, from the 
mechanic whose savings are melting away during an illness, 
from the widow who washes or sews from dawn to dark to 
feed her fatherless little ones ; and all that the dissolute may 
be saved from hunger, that the children of less impoverished 
neighbours may have cheap lessons, and that various people, 
mostly better off, may read newspapers and novels for noth- 
ing ! The error of nomenclature is, in one respect, more 
misleading than that which allows aggressionists to be called 
protectionists ; for, as just shown, protection of the vicious 
poor involves aggression on the virtuous poor. Doubtless it 
is true that the greater part of the money exacted comes from 
those who are relatively well-off. But this is no consolation 
to the ill-off from whom the rest is exacted. Nay, if the 
comparison be made between the pressures borne by the two 
classes respectively, it becomes manifest that the case is even 
worse than at first appears ; for while to the well-off the 
exaction means loss of luxuries, to the ill-off it means loss of 
necessaries. 

And now see the Nemesis which is threatening to follow 
this chronic sin of legislators. They and their class, in com- 
mon with all owners of property, are in danger of suffering 
from a sweeping application of that general principle practi- 
cally asserted by each of these confiscating Acts of Parlia- 
ment. For what is the tacit assumption on which such Acts 

116 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

proceed ? It is the assumption that no man has any claim 
to his property, not even to that which he has earned by the 
sweat of his brow, save by permission of the community ; 
and that the community may cancel the claim to any extent 
it thinks fit. No defence can be made for this appropriation 
of A's possessions for the benefit of B, save one which sets 
out with the postulate that society as a whole has an absolute 
right over the possessions of each member. And now this 
doctrine, which has been tacitly assumed, is being openly 
proclaimed. Mr. George and his friends, Mr. Hynd- 
man and his supporters, are pushing the theory to its 
logical issue. They have been instructed by examples, 
yearly increasing in number, that the individual has no 
rights but what the community may equitably over-ride ; 
and they are now saying — " It shall go hard but we 
will better the instruction," and abolish individual rights 
altogether. 

Legislative misdeeds of the classes above indicated are in 
large measure explained, and reprobation of them mitigated, 
when we look at the matter from afar off. They have their 
root in the error that society is a manufacture ; whereas it is 
a growth. Neither the culture of past times nor the culture 
of the present time, has given to any considerable number of 
people a scientific conception of a society — a conception of 
it as having a natural structure in which all its institutions, 
governmental, religious, industrial, commercial, &c, are inter- 
dependent^ bound — a structure which is in a sense organic. 
Or if such a conception is nominally entertained, it is not 
entertained in such way as to be operative on conduct. Con- 
trariwise, incorporated humanity is very commonly thought 
of as though it were like so much dough which the cook can 
mould as she pleases into pie-crust, or puff, or tartlet. The 
communist shows us unmistakably that he thinks of the body 
politic as admitting of being shaped thus or thus at will ; 
and the tacit implication of many Acts of Parliament is that 

THE SINS OF LEGISLATOES. 

117 

aggregated men, twisted into this or that arrangement, will 
remain as intended. 

It may indeed be said that, even irrespective of this er- 
roneous conception of a society as a plastic mass instead of as 
an organized body, facts forced on his attention hour by hour 
should make everyone sceptical as to the success of this or 
that proposed way of changing a people's actions. Alike to 
the citizen and to the legislator, home-experiences daily supply 
proofs that the conduct of human beings baulks calculation. 
He has given up the thought of managing his wife and lets 
her manage him. Children on whom he has tried now repri- 
mand, now punishment, now suasion, now reward, do not re- 
spond satisfactorily to any method ; and no expostulation 
prevents their mother from treating them in ways he thinks 
mischievous. So, too, his dealings with his servants, whether 
by reasoning or by scolding, rarely succeed for long ; the 
falling short of attention, or punctuality, or cleanliness, or 
sobriety, leads to constant changes. Yet, difficult as he finds 
it to deal with humanity in detail, he is confident of his ability 
to deal with embodied humanity. Citizens, not one-thousandth 
of whom he knows, not one-hundredth of whom he ever saw, 
and the great mass of whom belong to classes having habits 
and modes of thought of which he has but dim notions, he 
feels sure will act in ways he foresees, and fulfil ends he wishes. 
Is there not a marvellous incongruity between premises and 
conclusion ? 

One might have expected that whether they observed the 
implications of these domestic failures, or whether they con- 
templated in every newspaper the indications of a social life 
too vast, too varied, too involved, to be even vaguely pictured 
in thought, men would have entered on the business of law- 
making with the greatest hesitation. Yet in this more than 
anything else do they show a confident readiness. Nowhere 
is there so astounding a contrast between the difficulty of the 
task and the unpreparedness of those who undertake it. Un- 
questionably among monstrous beliefs one of the most mon- 

118 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

strous is that while for a simple handicraft, such as shoemak- 
ing, a long apprenticeship is needful, the sole thing which 
needs no apprenticeship is making a nation's laws ! 

Summing up the results of the discussion, may we not 
reasonably say that there lie before the legislator several open 
secrets, which yet are so open that they ought not to remain 
secrets to one who undertakes the vast and terrible responsi- 
bility of dealing with millions upon millions of human beings 
by measures which, if they do not conduce to their happiness, 
will increase their miseries and accelerate their deaths ? 

There is first of all the undeniable truth, conspicuous and 
yet absolutely ignored, that there are no phenomena which a 
society presents but what have their origins in the phenomena 
of individual human life, which again have their roots in vital 
phenomena at large. And there is the inevitable implication 
that unless these vital phenomena, bodily and mental, are 
chaotic in their relations (a supposition excluded by the very 
maintenance of life) the resulting phenomena cannot be wholly 
chaotic : there must be some kind of order in the phenomena 
which grow out of them when associated human beings have 
to co-operate. Evidently, then, when one who has not studied 
such resulting phenomena of social order, undertakes to regu- 
late society, he is pretty certain to work mischiefs. 

In the second place, apart from a priori reasoning, this 
conclusion should be forced on the legislator by comparisons 
of societies. It ought to be sufficiently manifest that before 
meddling with the details of social organization, inquiry 
should be made whether social organization has a natural 
history ; and that to answer this inquiry, it would be well, 
setting out with the simplest societies, to see in what respects 
social structures agree. Such comparative sociology, pur- 
sued to a very small extent, shows a substantial uniformity 
of genesis. The habitual existence of chieftainship, and the 
establishment of chiefly authority by war ; the rise every- 
where of the medicine man and priest ; the presence of a 

THE SINS OF LEGISLATOES. 

119 

cult having in all places the same fundamental traits ; the 
traces of division of labour, early displayed, which gradually 
become more marked ; and the various complications, politi- 
cal, ecclesiastical, industrial, which arise as groups are com- 
pounded and re-compounded by war; prove to any who 
compare them that, apart from all their special differences, 
societies have general resemblances in their modes of origin 
and development. They present traits of structure showing 
that social organization has laws which over-ride individual 
wills ; and laws the disregard of which must be fraught with 
disaster. 

And then, in the third place, there is that mass of guiding 
information yielded by the records of legislation in our own 
country and in other countries, which still more obviously 
demands attention. Here and elsewhere, attempts of multi- 
tudinous kinds, made by kings and statesmen, have failed to 
do the good intended and have worked unexpected evils. 
Century after century new measures like the old ones, and 
other measures akin in principle, have again disappointed 
hopes and again brought disaster. And yet it is thought 
neither by electors nor by those they elect, that there is any 
need for systematic study of that law-making which in by- 
gone ages went on working the ill-being of the people when 
it tried to achieve their well-being. Surely there can be no 
fitness for legislative functions without wide knowledge of 
those legislative experiences which the past has bequeathed. 

Reverting, then, to the analogy drawn at the outset, we 
must say that the legislator is morally blameless or morally 
blameworthy, according as he has or has not acquainted him- 
self with these several classes of facts. A physician who, 
after years of study, has gained a competent knowledge of 
physiology, pathology, and therapeutics, is not held crimi- 
nally responsible if a man dies under his treatment : he has 
prepared himself as well as he can, and has acted to the best 
of his judgment. Similarly the legislator whose measures 
produce evil instead of good, notwithstanding the extensive 

120 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

and methodic inquiries which helped him to decide, cannot 
be held to have committed more than an error of reasoning. 
Contrariwise, the legislator who is wholly or in great part 
uninformed concerning the masses of facts which he must 
examine before his opinion on a proposed law can be of any 
value, and who nevertheless helps to pass that law, can no 
more be absolved if misery and mortality result, than the 
journeyman druggist can be absolved when death is caused 
by the medicine he ignorantly prescribes. 

OVER-LEGISLATION. 

From time to time there returns on the cautious thinker 
the conclusion that, considered simply as a question of prob- 
abilities, it is unlikely that his views upon any debatable 
topic are correct. "Here," he reflects, "are thousands 
around me holding on this or that point opinions differing 
from mine — wholly in many cases ; partially in most others. 
Each is as confident as I am of the truth of his convictions. 
Many of them are possessed of great intelligence ; and, rank 
myself high as I may, I must admit that some are my equals 
— perhaps my superiors. Yet, while every one of us is sure 
he is right, unquestionably most of us are wrong. Why 
should not I be among the mistaken ? True, I cannot realize 
the likelihood that I am so. But this proves nothing; for 
though the majority of us are necessarily in error, we all 
labor under the inability to think we are in error. Is it not 
then foolish thus to trust myself ? A like warrant has been 
felt by men all the world through ; and, in nine cases out of 
ten, has proved a delusive warrant. Is it not then absurd 
in me to put so much faith in my judgments?" 

Barren of practical results as this reflection at first sight 
appears, it may, and indeed should, influence some of our 
most important proceedings. Though in daily life we are 
constantly obliged to act out our inferences, trustless as they 
may be ; though in the house, in the office, in the street, there 
hourly arise occasions on which we may not hesitate ; seeing 

121 

122 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

that if to act is dangerous, never to act at all is fatal ; and 
though consequently, on our private conduct, this abstract 
doubt as to the worth of our judgments must remain inop- 
erative ; yet in our public conduct, we may properly allow it 
to weigh. Here decision is no longer imperative ; while the 
difficulty of deciding aright is incalculably greater. Clearly 
as we may think we see how a given measure will work, 
we may infer, drawing the above induction from human 
experience, that the chances are many against the truth of 
our anticipations. Whether in most cases it is not wiser to 
do nothing, becomes now a rational question. Continuing 
his self-criticism, the cautious thinker may reason: — "If in 
these personal affairs, where all the conditions of the case 
were known to me, I have so often miscalculated, how much 
oftener shall I miscalculate in political affairs, where the 
conditions are too numerous, too widespread, too complex, 
too obscure to be understood. Here, doubtless, is a social 
evil and there a desideratum; and were I sure of doing no 
mischief I would forthwith try to cure the one and achieve 
the other. But when I remember how many of my private 
schemes have miscarried; how speculations have failed, 
agents proved dishonest, marriage been a disappointment; 
how I did but pauperize the relative I sought to help ; how 
my carefully-governed son has turned out worse than most 
children; how the thing I desperately strove against as a 
misfortune did me immense good; how while the objects I 
ardently pursued brought me little happiness when gained, 
most of my pleasures have come from unexpected sources; 
when I recall these and hosts of like facts, I am struck with 
the incompetence of my intellect to prescribe for society. 
And as the evil is one under which society has not only lived 
but grown, while the desideratum is one it may spontaneous- 
ly obtain, as it has most others, in some unforeseen way, I 
question the propriety of meddling." 

OVER-LEGISLATION. 

123 

II. 

There is a great want of this practical humility in our 
political conduct. Though we have less self-confidence than 
our ancestors, who did not hesitate to organize in law their 
judgments on all subjects whatever, we have yet far too 
much. Though we have ceased to assume the infallibility of 
our theological beliefs and so ceased to enact them, we have 
not ceased to enact hosts of other beliefs of an equally doubt- 
ful kind. Though we no longer presume to coerce men for 
their spiritual good, we still think ourselves called upon to 
coerce them for their material good: not seeing that the one 
is as useless and as unwarrantable as the other. Innumer- 
able failures seem, so far, powerless to teach this. Take up 
a daily paper and you will probably find a leader exposing 
the corruption, negligence, or mismanagement of some State- 
department. Cast your eye down the next column, and it is 
not unlikely that you will read proposals for an extension 
of State-supervision. Yesterday came a charge of gross care- 
lessness against the Colonial Office. To-day Admiralty bun- 
glings are burlesqued. To-morrow brings the question, 
"Should there not be more coal-mine inspectors?" Now 
there is a complaint that the Board of Health is useless ; and 
now an outcry for more railway regulation. "While your 
ears are still ringing with denunciations of Chancery abuses, 
or your cheeks still glowing with indignation at some well- 
exposed iniquity of the Ecclesiastical Courts, you suddenly 
come upon suggestions for organizing "a priesthood of 
science." Here is a vehement condemnation of the police 
for stupidly allowing sight-seers to crush each other to death. 
You look for the corollary that official regulation is not to 
be trusted ; when, instead, a propos of a shipwreck, you read 
an urgent demand for government-inspectors to see that 
ships always have their boats ready for launching. Thus, 
while every day chronicles a failure, there every day re- 
appears the belief that it needs but an Act of Parliament 
and a staff of officers to effect any end desired. Nowhere is 

124 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

the perennial faith of mankind better seen. Ever since so- 
ciety existed Disappointment has been preaching, ;'Put not 
your trust in legislation"; and yet the trust in legislation 
seems scarcely diminished. 

Did the State fulfil efficiently its unquestionable duties, 
there would be some excuse for this eagerness to assign it 
further duties. Were there no complaints of its faulty ad- 
ministration of justice ; of its endless delays and untold ex- 
penses; of its bringing ruin in place of restitution; of its 
playing the tyrant where it should have been the protector : 
did we never hear of its complicated stupidities ; its 20,000 
statutes, which it assumes all Englishmen to know, and 
which not one Englishman does know ; its multiplied forms, 
which, in the effort to meet every contingency, open far 
more loopholes than they provide against : had it not shown 
its folly in the system of making every petty alteration by 
a new act, variously affecting innumerable preceding acts; 
or in its score of successive sets of Chancery rules, which so 
modify, and limit, and extend, and abolish, and alter each 
other, that not even Chancery lawyers know what the rules 
are ; were we never astounded by such a fact as that, under 
the system of land registration in Ireland, £6,000 have been 
spent in a "negative search" to establish the title of an 
estate ; did we find in its doing no such terrible incongruity 
as the imprisonment of a hungry vagrant for stealing a 
turnip, while for the gigantic embezzlements of a railway 
director it inflicts no punishment; had we, in short, proved 
its efficiency as judge and defender, instead of having found 
it treacherous, cruel, and anxiously to be shunned, there 
would be some encouragement to hope other benefits at its 
hands. 

Or if, while failing in its judicial functions, the State 
had proved itself a capable agent in some other department 
— the military for example — there would have been some 
show of reason for extending its sphere of action. Suppose 
that it had rationally equipped its troops, instead of giving 

OVER-LEGISLATION. 125 

them cumbrous and ineffective muskets, barbarous grenadier- 
caps, absurdly heavy knapsacks and cartouche-boxes, and 
clothing colored so as admirably to help the enemy's marks- 
men; suppose that it organized well and economically, in- 
stead of salarying an immense superfluity of officers, creat- 
ing sinecure colonelcies of £4,000 a year, neglecting the meri- 
torious and promoting incapables, suppose that its soldiers 
were always well housed instead of being thrust into bar- 
racks that invalid hundreds, as at Aden, or that fall on their 
occupants, as at Loodianah, where ninety-five were thus 
killed ; suppose that, in actual war it had shown due admin- 
istrative ability, instead of occasionally leaving its regiments 
to march barefoot, to dress in patches, to capture their own 
engineering tools, and to fight on empty stomachs, as during 
the Peninsular campaign ; suppose all this, and the wish for 
more State-control might still have had some warrant. 

Even though it had bungled in everything else, yet had 
it in one case done well — had its naval management alone 
been efficient — the sanguine would have had a colorable ex- 
cuse for expecting success in a new field. Grant that the 
reports about bad ships, ships that will not sail, ships that 
have to be lengthened, ships with unfit engines, ships that 
will not carry their guns, ships without stowage, and ships 
that have to be broken up, are all untrue; assume those to 
be mere slanderers who say that the Megcera took double the 
time taken by a commercial steamer to reach the Cape ; that 
during the same voyage the Hydra was three times on fire, 
and needed the pumps kept going day and night; that the 
Charlotte troop-ship set out with 75 days' provisions on 
board, and was three months in reaching her destination ; 
that the Harpy, at an imminent risk of life, got home in 110 
days from Rio ; disregard as calumnies the statements about 
septuagenarian admirals, dilettante ship building, and 
"cooked" dockyard accounts; set down the affair of the 
Goldner preserved meats as a myth, and consider Professor 
Barlow mistaken when he reported of the Admiralty com- 

126 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

passes in store, that "at least one-half were mere lumber"; 
let all these, we say, be held groundless charges, and there 
would remain for the advocates of much government some 
basis for their political air-castles, spite of military and 
judicial mismanagement. 

As it is, however, they seem to have read backwards the 
parable of the talents. Not to the agent of proved efficiency 
do they consign further duties, but to the negligent and 
blundering agent. Private enterprise has done much, and 
done it well. Private enterprise has cleared, drained, and 
fertilized the country, and built the towns; has excavated 
mines, laid out roads, dug canals, and embanked railways; 
has invented, and brought to perfection ploughs, looms, 
steam-engines, printing-presses, and machines innumerable; 
has built our ships, our vast manufactories, our docks; has 
established banks, insurance societies, and the newspaper 
press; has covered the sea with lines of steam-vessels, and 
the land with electric telegraphs. Private enterprise has 
brought agriculture, manufactures, and commerce to their 
present height, and is now developing them with increasing 
rapidity. Therefore, do not trust private enterprise. On 
the other hand, the State so fulfils its judicial function as 
to ruin many, delude others, and frighten away those who 
most need succor ; its national defences are so extravagantly 
and yet inefficiently administered as to call forth almost 
daily complaint, expostulation, or ridicule ; and as the na- 
tion's steward, it obtains from some of our vast public 
estates a minus revenue. Therefore, trust the State. Slight 
the good and faithful servant, and promote the unprofitable 
one from one talent to ten. 

Seriously, the case, while it may not, in some respects, 
warrant this parallel, is, in one respect, even stronger. For 
the new work is not of the same order as the old, but of 
a more difficult order. Ill as government discharges its true 
duties, any other duties committed to it are likely to be still 
worse discharged. To guard its subjects against aggression, 

OVEK-LEGISLATION. 

127 

either individual or national, is a straightforward and 
tolerably simple matter; to regulate, directly or indirectly, 
the personal actions of those subjects is an infinitely com- 
plicated matter. It is one thing to secure to each man the 
unhindered power to pursue his own good; it is a widely 
different thing to pursue the good for him. To do the first 
efficiently, the State has merely to look on while its citizens 
act; to forbid unfairness; to adjudicate when called on; 
and to enforce restitution for injuries. To do the last 
efficiently, it must become an ubiquitous worker — must know 
each man 's needs better than he knows them himself — must, 
in short, possess superhuman power and intelligence. Even, 
therefore, had the State done well in its proper sphere, no 
sufficient warrant would have existed for extending that 
sphere; but seeing how ill it has discharged those simple 
offices which we cannot help consigning to it, small indeed 
is the probability that it will discharge well offices of a more 
complicated nature. 

Change the point of view however we may, and this con- 
clusion still presents itself. If we define the primary State- 
duty to be that of protecting each individual against others, 
then, all other State-action comes under the definition of pro- 
tecting each individual against himself — against his own 
stupidity, his own idleness, his own improvidence, rashness, 
or other defect — his own incapacity for doing something or 
other which should be done. There is no questioning this 
classification. For manifestly all the obstacles that lie be- 
tween a man 's desires and the satisfaction of them are either 
obstacles arising from other men's counter-desires, or ob- 
stacles arising from inability in himself. Such of these 
counter-desires as are just, have as much claim to satisfac- 
tion as his; and may not, therefore, be thwarted. Such of 
them as are unjust, it is the State's duty to hold in check. 
The only other possible sphere for it, therefore, is that of 
saving the individual from the consequences of his nature, 
or, as we say — protecting him against himself. Making no 

128 

THE MAN VEESVS THE STATE. 

comment, at present, on the policy of this, and confining 
ourselves solely to the practicability of it, let us inquire how 
the proposal looks when reduced to its simplest form. Here 
are men possessed of instincts, and sentiments, and percep- 
tions, all conspiring to self-preservation. The due action of 
each brings its quantum of pleasure ; the inaction, its more 
or less of pain. Those provided with these faculties in due 
proportions prosper and multiply ; those ill-provided tend to 
die out. And the general success of this human organiza- 
tion is seen in the fact that under it the world has been 
peopled, and by it the complicated appliances and arrange- 
ments of civilized life have been developed. It is com- 
plained, however, that there are certain directions in which 
this apparatus of motives works but imperfectly. While it is 
admitted that men are duly prompted by it to bodily sus- 
tenance, to the obtainment of clothing and shelter, to mar- 
riage and the care of offspring, and to the establishment 
of the more important industrial and commercial agencies; 
it is argued that there are many desiderata, as pure air, more 
knowledge, good water, safe travelling, and so forth, which 
it does not duly achieve. And these shortcomings being 
assumed permanent, it is urged that some supplementary 
means must be employed. It is therefore proposed that out 
of the mass of men a certain number, constituting the legis- 
lature, shall be instructed to attain these various objects. 
The legislators thus instructed (all characterized, on the 
average, by the same defects in this apparatus of motives 
as men in general), being unable personally to fulfil their 
tasks, must fulfil them by deputy — must appoint commis- 
sions, boards, councils, and staffs of officers; and must con- 
struct their agencies of this same defective humanity that 
acts so ill. Why now should this system of complex deputa- 
tion succeed where the system of simple deputation does 
not? The industrial, commercial, and philanthropic agen- 
cies, which citizens form spontaneously, are directly deputed 
agencies ; these governmental agencies made by electing legis- 

OVER-LEGISLATION. 

129 

lators who appoint officers are indirectly deputed ones. And 
it is hoped that, by this process of double deputation, things 
may be achieved which the process of single deputation will 
not achieve. What is the rationale of this hope ? Is it that 
legislators, and their employes, are made to feel more in- 
tensely than the rest these evils they are to remedy, these 
wants they are to satisfy ? Hardly ; for by position they are 
mostly relieved from such evils and wants. Is it, then, that 
they are to have the primary motive replaced by a secondary 
motive — the fear of public displeasure, and ultimate removal 
from office? Why scarcely; for the minor benefits which 
citizens will not organize to secure directly, they will not 
organize to secure indirectly, by turning out inefficient ser- 
vants: especially if they cannot readily get efficient ones. 
Is it, then, that these State-agents are to do from a sense 
of duty, what they would not do from any other motive? 
Evidently this is the only possibility remaining. The propo- 
sition on which the advocates of much government have to 
fall back is, that things which the people will not unite to 
effect for personal benefit, a law-appointed portion of them 
will unite to effect for the benefit of the rest. Public men 
and functionaries love their neighbors better than them- 
selves ! The philanthropy of statesmen is stronger than the 
selfishness of citizens! 

No wonder, then, that every day adds to the list of legis- 
lative miscarriages. If colliery explosions increase, notwith- 
standing the appointment of coal-mine inspectors, why, it is 
but a natural sequence to these false methods. If Sunder- 
land shipowners complain that, as far as tried, "the Mer- 
cantile Marine Act has proved a total failure"; and if, 
meanwhile, the other class affected by it — the sailors — show 
their disapprobation by extensive strikes; why, it does but 
exemplify the folly of trusting a theorizing benevolence 
rather than an experienced self-interest. On all sides we 
may expect such facts ; and on all sides we find them. Gov- 
ernment, turning engineer, appoints its lieutenant, the 

130 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

Sewers' Commission, to drain London. Presently Lambeth 
sends deputations to say that it pays heavy rates, and gets 
no benefit. Tired of waiting, Bethnal Green calls meetings 
to consider "the most effectual means of extending the drain- 
age of the district. ' ' From Wandsworth come complainants, 
who threaten to pay no more until something is done. Cam- 
berwell proposes to raise a subscription and do the work 
itself. Meanwhile, no progress is made towards the purifica- 
tion of the Thames ; the weekly returns show an increasing 
rate of mortality ; in Parliament, the friends of the Commis- 
sion have nothing save good intentions to urge in mitigation 
of censure ; and, at length, despairing ministers gladly seize 
an excuse for quietly shelving the Commission and its plans 
altogether. As architectural surveyor, the State has scarcely 
succeeded better than as engineer ; witness the Metropolitan 
Buildings' Act. New houses still tumble down from time to 
time. A few months since, two fell at Bayswater, and one 
more recently near the Pentonville prison : all notwithstand- 
ing prescribed thicknesses, and hoop-iron bond, and inspec- 
tors. It never struck those who provided these delusive 
sureties that it was possible to build walls without bonding 
the two surfaces together, so that the inner layer might be 
removed after the surveyor's approval. Nor did they fore- 
see that, in dictating a larger quantity of bricks than ex- 
perience proved absolutely needful, they were simply 
insuring a slow deterioration of quality to an equivalent 
extent. The government guarantee for safe passenger-ships 
answers no better than its guarantee for safe houses. Though 
the burning of the Amazon arose from either bad construc- 
tion or bad stowage, she had received the Admiralty certifi- 
cate before sailing. Notwithstanding official approval, the 
Adelaide was found, on her first voyage, to steer ill, to have 
useless pumps, ports that let floods of water into the cabins, 
and coals so near the furnaces that they twice caught fire. 
The W. S. Lindsay, which turned out unfit for sailing, had 
been passed by the government agent; and, but for the 

OVER-LEGISLATION. 

131 

owner, might have gone to sea at a great risk of life. The 
Melbourne — originally a State-built ship — which took twen- 
ty-four days to reach Lisbon, and then needed to be docked 
to undergo a thorough repair, had been duly inspected. And 
lastly, the notorious Australian, before her third futile at- 
tempt to proceed on her voyage, had, her owners tell us, 
received "the full approbation of the government inspec- 
tor." Neither does the like supervision give security to 
land-travelling. The iron bridge at Chester, which, break- 
ing, precipitated a train into the Dee, had passed under 
the official eye. Inspection did not prevent a column on the 
South-E astern from being so placed as to kill a man who put 
his head out of the carriage window. The locomotive that 
burst at Brighton lately did so notwithstanding a State-ap- 
proval given but ten days previously. And — to look at the 
facts in the gross — this system of supervision has not pre- 
vented the increase of railway accidents ; which, be it remem- 
bered, has arisen since the system was commenced. 

III. 

"Well; let the State fail. It can but do its best. If it 
succeed, so much the better : if it do not, where is the harm ? 
Surely it is wiser to act, and take the chance of success, than 
to do nothing." To this plea the rejoinder is that, unfor- 
tunately, the results of legislative intervention are not only 
negatively bad, but often positively so. Acts of Parliament 
do not simply fail; they frequently make worse. The fa- 
miliar truth that persecution aids rather than hinders pro- 
scribed doctrines — a truth lately afresh illustrated by the 
forbidden work of Gervinus — is a part of the general truth 
that legislation often does indirectly the reverse of that 
which it directly aims to do. Thus has it been with the 
Metropolitan Buildings' Act. As was lately agreed unani- 
mously by the delegates from all the parishes in London, 
and as was stated by them to Sir William Molesworth, this 
act "has encouraged bad building, and has been the means 

132 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

of covering the suburbs of the metropolis with thousands of 
wretched hovels, which are a disgrace to a civilized coun- 
try." Thus, also, has it been in provincial towns. The 
Nottingham Inelosure Act of 1845, by prescribing the struc- 
ture of the houses to be built, and the extent of yard or 
garden to be allotted to each, has rendered it impossible to 
build working-class dwellings at such moderate rents as to 
compete with existing ones. It is estimated that, as a con- 
sequence, 10,000 of the population are debarred from the 
new homes they would otherwise have, and are forced to live 
crowded together in miserable places unfit for human habita- 
tion ; and so, in its anxiety to insure healthy accommodation 
for artisans, the law has entailed on them still worse accom- 
modations than before. Thus, too, has it been with the 
Passengers' Act. The terrible fevers which arose in the 
Australian emigrant ships a few months since, causing in 
the Buorneuf 83 deaths, in the Wanota 39 deaths, in the 
Marco Polo 53 deaths, and in the Ticonderoga 104 deaths, 
arose in vessels sent out by the government; and arose in 
consequence of the close packing which the Passengers' Act 
authorizes. Thus, moreover, has it been with the safeguards 
provided by the Mercantile Marine Act. The examinations 
devised for insuring the efficiency of captains have had the 
effect of certifying the superficially-clever and unpractised 
men, and, as we are told by a shipowner, rejecting many of 
the long-tried and most trustworthy : the general result be- 
ing that the ratio of shipwrecks has increased. Thus also has 
it happened with Boards of Health, which have, in sundry 
cases, exacerbated the evils to be removed ; as, for instance, 
at Croydon, where, according to the official report, the meas- 
ures of the sanitary authorities produced an epidemic, which 
attacked 1,600 people and killed 70. Thus again has it been 
with the Joint Stock Companies Registration Act. As was 
shown by Mr. James Wilson, in his late motion for a select 
committee on'lif e-assurance associations, this measure, passed 
in 1844 to guard the public against bubble schemes, actually 

OVEB-LEGISLATION. 

133 

facilitated the rascalities of 1845 and subsequent years. The 
legislative sanction, devised as a guarantee of genuineness, 
and supposed by the people to be such, clever adventurers 
have without difficulty obtained for the most worthless proj- 
ects. Having obtained it, an amount of public confidence 
has followed which they could never otherwise have gained. 
In this way literally hundreds of sham enterprises that 
would not else have seen the light have been fostered into 
being; and thousands of families have been ruined who 
would never have been so but for legislative efforts to make 
them more secure. 

Moreover, when these topical remedies applied by states- 
men do not exacerbate the evils they were meant to cure, 
they constantly induce collateral evils; and these often 
graver than the original ones. It is the vice of this empirical 
school of politicians that they never look beyond proximate 
causes and immediate effects. In common with the unedu- 
cated masses they habitually regard each phenomenon as in- 
volving but one antecedent and one consequent. They do 
not bear in mind that each phenomenon is a link in an 
infinite series — is the result of myriads of preceding phe- 
nomena, and will have a share in producing myriads of 
succeeding ones. Hence they overlook the fact that, in dis- 
turbing any natural chain of sequences, they are not only 
modifying the result next in succession, but all the future 
results into which this will enter as a part-cause. The serial 
genesis of phenomena, and the interaction of each series 
upon every other series, produces a complexity utterly be- 
yond human grasp. Even in the simplest cases this is so. 
A servant who puts coals on the fire sees but few effects 
from the burning of a lump. The man of science, however, 
knows that there are very many effects. He knows that the 
combustion establishes numerous atmospheric currents, and 
through them moves thousands of cubic feet of air inside the 
house and out. He knows that the heat diffused causes ex- 
pansions and subsequent contractions of all bodies within 

134 

THE MAN VEBSUS THE STATE. 

its range. He knows that the persons warmed are affected 
in their rate of respiration and their waste of tissue; and 
that these physiological changes must have various secondary- 
results. He knows that, could he trace to their ramified conse- 
quences all the forces disengaged, mechanical, chemical, ther- 
mal, electric — could he enumerate all the subsequent effects 
of the evaporation caused, the gases generated, the light 
evolved, the heat radiated ; a volume would scarcely suffice to 
enter them. If, now, from a simple inorganic change such 
numerous and complex results arise, how infinitely multi- 
plied and involved must be the ultimate consequences of any 
force brought to bear upon society. Wonderfully construct- 
ed as it is — mutually dependent as are its members for 
the satisfaction of their wants — affected as each unit of it 
is by his fellows, not only as to his safety and prosperity, but 
in his health, his temper, his culture; the social organism 
cannot be dealt with in any one part, without all other parts 
being influenced in ways which cannot be foreseen. You 
put a duty on paper, and by-and-by find that, through the 
medium of the jacquard-cards employed, you have inad- 
vertently taxed figured silk, sometimes to the extent of sev- 
eral shillings per piece. On removing the impost from 
bricks, you discover that its existence had increased the 
dangers of mining, by preventing shafts from being lined 
and workings from being tunnelled. By the excise on soap, 
you have, it turns out, greatly encouraged the use of caustic 
washing-powders; and so have unintentionally entailed an 
immense destruction of clothes. In every case you perceive, 
on careful inquiry, that besides acting upon that which you 
sought to act upon, you have acted upon many other things, 
and each of these again on many others ; and so have propa- 
gated a multitude of changes in all directions. We need 
feel no surprise, then, that in their efforts to cure specific 
evils, legislators have continually caused collateral evils they 
never looked for. No Carlyle 's wisest man, nor any body of 
such, could avoid causing them. Though their production is 

OVER-LEGISLATION. 

135 

explicable enough after it has occurred, it is never antici- 
pated. When, under the new Poor-Law, provision was made 
for the accommodation of vagrants in the union-houses,* it 
was hardly expected that a body of tramps would be thereby 
called into existence, who would spend their time in walking 
from union to union throughout the kingdom. It was little 
thought by those who in past generations assigned parish- 
pay for the maintenance of illegitimate children, that, as a 
result, a family of such would by-and-by be considered a 
small fortune, and the mother of them a desirable wife ; nor 
did the same statesmen see that, by the law of settlement, 
they were organizing a disastrous inequality of wages in 
different districts, and entailing a system of clearing away 
cottages, which would result in the crowding of bedrooms, 
and in a consequent moral and physical deterioration. The 
English tonnage-law was enacted simply with a view to 
regulate the mode of measurement. Its framers overlooked 
the fact that they were practically providing "for the effec- 
tual and compulsory construction of bad ships"; and that 
"to cheat the law, that is, to build a tolerable ship in spite 
of it, was the highest achievement left to an English 
builder." Greater commercial security was alone aimed at 
by the partnership-law. We now find, however, that the 
unlimited liability it insists upon is a serious hindrance to 
progress ; it practically forbids the association of small cap- 
italists; it is found a great obstacle to the building of im- 
proved dwellings for the people; it prevents a better 
relationship between artisans and employers; and by with- 
holding from the working-classes good investments for their 
savings, it checks the growth of provident habits and en- 
courages drunkenness. Thus on all sides are well-meant 
measures producing unforeseen mischiefs; a licensing-law 
that promotes the adulteration of* beer ; a ticket-of -leave sys- 
tem that encourages men to commit crime; a police-regula- 

* Workhouses supported by the Union of several communities. In 
Scotland they are called "combination poorhouses." 

136 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

tion that forces street-huxters into the workhouse. And 
then, in addition to the obvious and proximate evils, come 
the remote and less distinguishable ones, which, could we 
estimate their accumulated result, we should probably find 
even more serious. 

IV. 

But the thing to be discussed is, not so much whether, by 
any amount of intelligence, it is possible for a government 
to work out the various ends consigned to it, as whether its 
fulfillment of them is probable. It is less a question of can 
than a question of mil. Granting the absolute competence 
of the State, let us consider what hope there is of getting 
from it satisfactory performance. Let us look at the mov- 
ing force by which the legislative machine is worked, and 
then inquire whether this force is thus employed as eco- 
nomically as it would otherwise be. 

Manifestly, as desire of some kind is the invariable stimu- 
lus to action in the individual, every social agency, of what 
nature soever, must have some aggregate of desires for its 
motive power. Men in their collective capacity can exhibit 
no result but what has its origin in some appetite, feeling, 
or taste common among them. Did not they like meat, there 
could be no cattle-graziers, no Smithfield, no distributing or- 
ganization of butchers. Operas, philharmonic societies, song- 
books, and street organ-boys, have all been called into being 
by our love of music. Look through the trades' directory; 
take up a guide to the London sights; read the index of 
Bradshaw's time-tables, the reports of the learned societies, 
or the advertisements of new books ; and you see in the pub- 
lication itself, and in the things it describes, so many prod- 
ucts of human activities, stimulated by human desires. Un- 
der this stimulus grow up agencies alike the most gigantic 
and the most insignificant, the most complicated and the most 
simple — agencies for national defence and for the sweeping 
of crossings; for the daily distribution of letters, and for 
the collection of bits of coal out of the Thames mud; agen- 

OVER-LEGISLATION. 

137 

cies that subserve all ends, from the preaching of Christi- 
anity to the protection of ill-treated animals; from the 
production of bread for a nation to the supply of groundsel 
for caged singing-birds. The accumulated desires of indi- 
viduals being, then, the moving power by which every social 
agency is worked, the question to be considered is, Which is 
the most economical kind of agency ? The agency having no 
power in itself, but being merely an instrument, our inquiry 
must be for the most efficient instrument; the instrument 
that costs least, and wastes the smallest amount of the mov- 
ing power; the instrument least liable to get out of order, 
and most readily put right again when it goes wrong. Of 
the two kinds of social mechanism exemplified above, the 
spontaneous and the governmental, which is the best? 

From the form of this question will be readily foreseen 
the intended answer, that is the best mechanism which con- 
tains the fewest parts. The common saying, "What you 
wish well done you must do yourself," embodies a truth 
equally applicable to political life as to private life. The 
experience that farming by bailiff entails loss, while tenant- 
farming pays, is an experience still better illustrated in na- 
tional history than in a landlord's account-books. This 
transference of power from constituencies to members of 
Parliament, from these to the executive, from the executive 
to a board, from the board to inspectors, and from inspectors 
through their subs down to the actual workers — this operat- 
ing through a series of levers, each of which absorbs in 
friction and inertia part of the moving force ; is as bad, in 
virtue of its complexity, as the direct employment by society 
of individuals, private companies, and spontaneously-formed 
institutions, is good in virtue of its simplicity. Fully to 
appreciate the contrast, we must compare in detail the work- 
ing of the two systems. 

Officialism is habitually slow. When non-governmental 
agencies are dilatory, the public has its remedy : it ceases 
to employ them and soon finds quicker ones. Under this 

138 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

discipline all private bodies are taught promptness. But for 
delays in State-departments there is no such easy cure. Life- 
long Chancery suits must be patiently borne; Museum- 
catalogues must be wearily waited for. While, by the people 
themselves, a Crystal Palace is designed, erected, and filled, 
in the course of a few months, the legislature takes twenty 
years to build itself a new house. "While, by private persons, 
the debates are daily printed and dispersed over the king- 
dom within a few hours of their utterance, the Board of 
Trade tables are regularly published a month, and some- 
times more, after date. And so throughout. Here is a 
Board of Health which, since 1849, has been about to close 
the metropolitan graveyards, but has not done it yet; and 
which has so long dawdled over projects for cemeteries, that 
the London Necropolis Company has taken the matter out of 
its hands. Here is a patentee who has had fourteen years' 
correspondence with the Horse Guards, before getting a 
definite answer respecting the use of his improved boot for 
the Army. Here is a Plymouth port-admiral who delays 
sending out to look for the missing boats of the Amazon 
until ten days after the wreck. 

Again, officialism is stupid. Under the natural course of 
things each citizen tends towards his fittest function. Those 
who are competent to the kind of work they undertake, 
succeed, and, in the average of cases, are advanced in propor- 
tion to their efficiency; while the incompetent, society soon 
finds out, ceases to employ, forces to try something easier, 
and eventually turns to use. But it is quite otherwise in 
State-organizations. Here, as every one knows, birth, age, 
backstairs intrigue, and sycophancy, determine the selections 
rather than merit. The "fool of the family" readily finds 
a place in the Church, if "the family" have good connec- 
tions. A youth too ill-educated for any profession does very 
well for an officer in the Army. Grey hair, or a title, is a 
far better guarantee of naval promotion than genius is. 
Nay, indeed, the man of capacity often finds that, in govern- 

OVEK-LEGISLATION. 

139 

ment offices, superiority is a hindrance — that his chiefs hate 
to be pestered with his proposed improvements, and are 
offended by his implied criticisms. Not only, therefore, is 
legislative machinery complex, but it is made of inferior 
materials. Hence the blunders we daily read of ; the supply- 
ing to the dockyards from the royal forests of timber unfit 
for use ; the administration of relief during the Irish famine 
in such a manner as to draw laborers from the field, and 
diminish the subsequent harvest by one-fourth; the filing 
of patents at three different offices and keeping an index at 
none. Everywhere does this bungling show itself, from the 
elaborate failure of House of Commons ventilation down to 
the publication of The London Gazette, which invariably 
comes out wrongly folded. 

A further characteristic of officialism is its extravagance. 
In its chief departments, Army, Navy, and Church, it em- 
ploys far more officers than are needful, and pays some of 
the useless ones exorbitantly. The work done by the Sewers 
Commission has cost, as Sir B. Hall tells us, from 300 to 
400 per cent, over the contemplated outlay ; while the man- 
agement charges have reached thirty-five, forty, and forty- 
five per cent, on the expenditure. The trustees of Ramsgate 
Harbor — a harbor, by the way, that has taken a century to 
complete — are spending £18,000 a year in doing what 
£5,000 has been proved sufficient for. The Board of Health 
is causing new surveys to be made of all the towns under its 
control — a proceeding which, as Mr. Stephenson states, and 
as every tyro in engineering knows, is, for drainage pur- 
poses, a wholly needless expense. These public agencies 
are subject to no such influence as that which obliges private 
enterprise to be economical. Traders, and mercantile bodies 
succeed by serving society cheaply. Such of them as cannot 
do this are continually supplanted by those who can. They 
cannot saddle the nation with the results of their extrava- 
gance, and so are prevented from being extravagant. On 
works that are to return a profit it does not answer to spend 

140 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

forty-eight per cent, of the capital in superintendence, as 
in the engineering department of the Indian Government; 
and Indian railway companies, knowing this, manage to 
keep their superintendence charges within eight per cent. 
A shopkeeper leaves out -of his accounts no item analogous 
to that £6,000,000 of its revenues, which Parliament allows 
to be deducted on the way to the Exchequer. Walk through 
a manufactory, and you see that the stern alternatives, care- 
fulness or ruin, dictate the saving of every penny ; visit one 
of the national dockyards, and the comments you make on 
any glaring wastefulness are carelessly met by the slang 
phrase, "Nunky* pays." 

The unadaptiveness of officialism is another of its vices. 
Unlike private enterprise which quickly modifies its actions 
to meet emergencies; unlike the shopkeeper who promptly 
finds the wherewith to satisfy a sudden demand ; unlike the 
railway-company which doubles its trains to carry a special 
influx of passengers ; the law-made instrumentality lumbers 
on under all varieties of circumstances through its ordained 
routine at its habitual rate. By its very nature it is fitted 
only for average requirements, and inevitably fails under 
unusual requirements. You cannot step into the street 
without having the contrast thrust upon you. Is it sum- 
mer ? You see the water-carts going their prescribed rounds 
with scarcely any regard to the needs of the weather — to-day 
sprinkling afresh the already moist roads; to-morrow be- 
stowing their showers with no greater liberality upon roads 
cloudy with dust. Is it winter ? You see the scavengers do 
not vary in number and activity according to the quantity 
of mud ; and if there comes a heavy fall of snow, you find 
the thoroughfares remaining for nearly a week in a scarcely 
passable state, without an effort being made, even in the 
heart of London, to meet the exigency. The late snow-storm, 
indeed, supplied a neat antithesis between the two orders of 

"Nunky" diminutive of "uncle." As we would say, "Uncle 
Sam pays." 

OVER-LEGISLATION. 

141 

agencies in the effects it respectively produced on omnibuses 
and cabs. Not being under a law-fixed tariff, the omnibuses 
put on extra horses and raised their fares. The cabs, on the 
contrary, being limited in their charges by an Act of Parlia- 
ment which, with the usual shortsightedness, never contem- 
plated such a contingency as this, declined to ply, deserted 
the stands and the stations, left luckless travellers to stumble 
home with their luggage as best they might, and so became 
useless at the very time of all others when they were most 
wanted! Not only by its unsusceptibility of adjustment 
does officialism entail serious inconveniences, but it likewise 
entails great injustices. In this case of cabs, for example, it 
has resulted since the late change of law, that old cabs, which 
were before saleable at £10 and £12 each, are now unsaleable 
and have to be broken up; and thus legislation has robbed 
cab-proprietors of part of their capital. Again, the recently- 
passed Smoke-Bill for London, which applies only within 
certain prescribed limits, has the effect of taxing one manu- 
facturer while leaving untaxed his competitor working with- 
in a quarter of a mile ; and so, as we are credibly informed, 
gives one an advantage of £1,500 a year over another. These 
typify the infinity of wrongs, varying in degrees of hard- 
ship, which legal regulations necessarily involve. Society, 
a living, growing organism, placed within apparatuses of 
dead, rigid, mechanical formulas, cannot fail to be hampered 
and pinched. The only agencies which can efficiently serve 
it are those through which its pulsations hourly flow, and 
which change as it changes. 

How invariably officialism becomes corrupt every one 
knows. Exposed to no such antiseptic as free competition 
— not dependent for existence, as private unendowed or- 
ganizations are, on the maintenance of a vigorous vitality; 
all law-made agencies fall into an inert, over-fed state, from 
which to disease is a short step. Salaries flow in irrespective 
of the activity with which duty is performed ; continue after 
duty wholly ceases; become rich prizes for the idle well- 

142 

THE MAN FEESUS THE STATE. 

born; and prompt to perjury, to bribery, to simony. East 
India directors are elected not for any administrative ca- 
pacity they have ; but they buy votes by promised patronage 
— a patronage alike asked and given in utter disregard of 
the welfare of a hundred millions of people. Registrars of 
wills not only get many thousands a year each for doing 
work which their miserably paid deputies leave half done; 
but they, in some cases, defraud the revenue, and that after 
repeated reprimands. Dockyard promotion is the result not 
of efficient services, but of political favoritism. That they 
may continue to hold rich livings, clergymen preach what 
they do not believe; bishops make false returns of their 
revenues; and at their elections to fellowships, well-to-do 
priests severally make oath that they are pauper, pius et 
doctus. From the local inspector whose eyes are shut to an 
abuse by a contractor's present, up to the prime minister 
who finds lucrative berths for his relations, this venality is 
daily illustrated; and that in spite of public reprobation 
and perpetual attempts to prevent it. As we once heard 
said by a State-official of twenty-five years' standing, 
' ' Wherever there is government there is villainy. " It is the 
inevitable result of destroying the direct connection between 
the profit obtained and the work performed. No incompe- 
tent person hopes, by offering a douceur in the Times, to get 
a permanent place in a mercantile office. But where, as 
under government, there is no employer's self-interest to 
forbid; where the appointment is made by some one on 
whom inefficiency entails no loss; there a douceur is oper- 
ative. In hospitals, in public charities, in endowed schools, 
in all social agencies in which duty done and income gained 
do not go hand in hand, the like corruption is found ; and is 
great in proportion as the dependence of income upon duty 
is remote. In State-organizations, therefore, corruption is 
unavoidable. In trading-organizations it rarely makes its 
appearance, and when it does, the instinct of self-preserva- 
tion soon provides a remedy. 

OVEK-LEGISLATION. 

143 

To all which broad contrasts add this, that while private 
bodies are enterprising and progressive, public bodies are 
unchanging, and, indeed, obstructive. That officialism 
should be inventive nobody expects. That it should go out 
of its easy mechanical routine to introduce improvements, 
and this at a considerable expense of thought and applica- 
tion, without the prospect of profit, is not to be supposed. 
But it is not simply stationary ; it resists every amendment 
either in itself or in anything with which it deals. Until 
now that county courts are taking away their practice, all 
agents of the law have doggedly opposed law-reform. The 
universities have maintained an old curriculum for centuries 
after it ceased to be fit; and are now struggling to prevent 
a threatened reconstruction. Every postal improvement has 
been vehemently protested against by the postal authorities. 
Mr. Whiston can say how pertinacious is the conservatism 
of Church grammar-schools. Not even the gravest conse- 
quences in view preclude official resistance : witness the fact 
that though, as already mentioned, Professor Barlow re- 
ported in 1820, of the Admiralty compasses then in store, 
that "at least one-half were mere lumber," yet notwith- 
standing the constant risk of shipwrecks thence arising, 
"very little amelioration in this state of things appears to 
have taken place until 1838 to 1840." Nor is official ob- 
structiveness to be readily overborne even by a powerful 
public opinion: witness the fact that though, for genera- 
tions, nine-tenths of the nation have disapproved this ec- 
clesiastical system which pampers the drones and starves the 
workers, and though commissions have been appointed to 
rectify it, it still remains substantially as it was: witness 
again the fact that though, since 1818, there have been a 
score of attempts to rectify the scandalous maladministra- 
tion of charitable trusts — though ten times in ten successive 
years remedial measures have been brought before Parlia- 
ment— the abuses still continue in all their grossness. Not 
only do these legal instrumentalities resist reforms in them- 

144 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

selves, but they hinder reforms in other things. In defend- 
ing their vested interests the clergy delay the closing of 
town burial-grounds. As Mr. Lindsay can show, government 
emigration-agents are checking the use of iron for sailing- 
vessels. Excise officers prevent improvements in the proces- 
ses they have to overlook. That organic conservatism which 
is visible in the daily conduct of all men is an obstacle which 
in private life self-interest slowly overcomes. The prospect 
of profit does, in the end, teach farmers that deep draining 
is good ; though it takes long to do this. Manufacturers do, 
ultimately, learn the most economical speed at which to work 
their steam-engines ; though precedent has long misled them. 
But in the public service, where there is no self-interest to 
overcome it, this conservatism exerts its full force; and 
produces results alike disastrous and absurd. For genera- 
tions after bookkeeping had become universal the Exchequer 
accounts were kept by notches cut on sticks. In the estimates 
for the current year appears the item, "Trimming the oil- 
lamps at the Horse-Guards." 

Between these law-made agencies and the spontaneously- 
formed ones, who then can hesitate ? The one class are slow, 
stupid, extravagant, unadaptive, corrupt, and obstructive: 
can any point out in the other, vices that balance these? 
It is true that trade has its dishonesties, speculation its fol- 
lies. These are evils inevitably entailed by the existing 
imperfections of humanity. It is equally true, however, that 
these imperfections of humanity are shared by State-func- 
tionaries; and that being unchecked in them by the same 
stern discipline, they grow to far worse results. Given a 
race of men having a certain proclivity to misconduct, and 
the question is, whether a society of these men shall be so 
organized that ill-conduct directly brings punishment, or 
whether it shall be so organized that punishment is but re- 
motely contingent on ill-conduct? Which will be the most 
healthful community — that in which agents who perform 
their functions badly, immediately suffer by the withdrawal 

OVER-LEGISLATION. 

145 

of public patronage; or that in which such agents can be 
made to suffer only through an apparatus of meetings, peti- 
tions, polling-booths, parliamentary divisions, cabinet-coun- 
cils, and red-tape documents ? Is it not an absurdly Utopian 
hope that men will behave better when correction is far 
removed and uncertain than when it is near at hand and 
inevitable ? Yet this is the hope which most political schem- 
ers unconsciously cherish. Listen to their plans, and you 
find that just what they propose to have done, they assume 
the appointed agents will do. That functionaries are trust- 
worthy is their first postulate. Doubtless could good officers 
be ensured, much might be said for officialism; just as des- 
potism would have its advantages could we ensure a good 
despot. 

If, however, we would duly appreciate the contrast 
between the artificial modes and the natural modes of achiev- 
ing social desiderata, we must look not only at the vices of the 
one but at the virtues of the other. These are many and im- 
portant. Consider first how immediately every private en- 
terprise is dependent on the need for it ; and how impossible 
it is for it to continue if there be no need. Daily are new 
trades and new companies established. If they subserve 
some existing public want, they take root and grow. If they 
do not, they die of inanition. It needs no agitation, no act 
of Parliament, to put them down. As with all natural or- 
ganizations, if there is no function for them no nutriment 
comes to them, and they dwindle away. Moreover, not only 
do the new agencies disappear if they are superfluous, but 
the old ones cease to be when they have done their work. 
Unlike public instrumentalities; unlike heralds' offices, 
which are maintained for ages after heraldy has lost all 
value ; unlike ecclesiastical courts, which continue to flourish 
for generations after they have become an abomination; 
these private instrumentalities dissolve when they become 
needless. A widely ramified coaching-system ceases to exist 
as soon as a more efficient railway-system comes into 

146 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

being. And not simply does it cease to exist, and to ab- 
stract funds, but the materials of which it was made are 
absorbed and turned to use. Coachmen, guards, and the 
rest, are employed to profit elsewhere; do not continue 
for twenty years a burden, like the compensated officials 
of some abolished department of the State. Consider, 
again, how necessarily these unordained agencies fit them- 
selves to their work. It is a law of all organized things that 
efficiency presupposes apprenticeship. Not only is it true 
that the young merchant must begin by carrying letters to 
the post, that the way to be a successful innkeeper is to com- 
mence as waiter ; not only is it true that in the development 
of the intellect there must come first the perceptions of iden- 
tity and duality, next of number, and that without these, 
arithmetic, algebra, and the infinitesimal calculus, remain 
impracticable ; but it is true that there is no part of an or- 
ganism but begins in some simple form with some insignifi- 
cant function, and passes to its final stage through successive 
phases of complexity. Every heart is at first a mere pul- 
satile sac ; every brain begins as a slight enlargement of the 
spinal cord. This law equally extends to the social organism. 
An instrumentality that is to work well must not be de- 
signed and suddenly put together by legislators, but must 
grow gradually from a germ ; each successive addition must 
be tried and proved good by experience before another addi- 
tion is made; and by this tentative process only, can an 
efficient instrumentality be produced. From a trustworthy 
man who receives deposits of money, insensibly grows up a 
vast banking-system, with its notes, checks, bills, its complex 
transactions, and its clearing-house. Pack-horses, then 
wagons, then coaches, then steam-carriages on common roads, 
and, finally, steam-carriages on roads made for them — such 
has been the slow genesis of our present means of communi- 
cation. Not a trade in the directory but has formed itself 
an apparatus of manufacturers, brokers, travellers, and re- 
tailers, in so gradual a way that no one can trace the steps. 

OVER-LEGISLATION. 

147 

And so with organizations of another order. The Zoological 
Gardens began as the private collection of a few naturalists. 
The best working-class school known — that at Price 's factory 
— commenced with half-a-dozen boys sitting among the 
candle-boxes, after hours, to teach themselves writing with 
worn-out pens. Mark, too, that as a consequence of their 
mode of growth, these spontaneously-formed agencies ex- 
pand to any extent required. The same stimulus which 
brought them into being makes them send their ramifica- 
tions wherever they are needed. But supply does not thus 
readily follow demand in governmental agencies. Appoint 
a board and a staff, fix their duties, and let the apparatus 
have a generation or two to consolidate, and you cannot get 
it to fulfil larger requirements without some Act of Par- 
liament obtained only after long delay and difficulty. 

Were there space, much more might be said upon the 
superiority of what naturalists would call the exogenous 
order of institutions over the endogenous one. But, from 
the point of view indicated, the further contrasts between 
their characteristics will be sufficiently visible. 

Hence then the fact, that while the one order of means 
is ever failing, making worse, or producing more evils than 
it cures, the other order of means is ever succeeding, ever 
improving. Strong as it looks at the outset, State-agency 
perpetually disappoints every one. Puny as are its first 
stages, private effort daily achieves results that astound 
the world. It is not only that joint-stock companies do so 
much ; it is not only that by them a whole kingdom is covered 
with railways in the same time that it takes the Admi- 
ralty to build a hundred-gun ship ; but it is that public 
instrumentalities are outdone even by individuals. The 
often quoted contrast between the Academy whose forty 
members took fifty-six years to compile the French dic- 
tionary, while Dr. Johnson alone compiled the English 
one in eight — a contrast still marked enough after making 
due set-off for the difference in the works — is by no means 

148 

THE MAN VEESUS THE STATE. 

without parallel. That great sanitary desideratum — the 
bringing of the New River to London * — which the wealth- 
iest corporation in the world attempted and failed, Sir 
Hugh Myddleton achieved single-handed. The first canal 
in England — a work of which government might have been 
thought the fit projector, and the only competent executor — 
was undertaken and finished as the private speculation of 
one man, the Duke of Bridgewater. By his own unaided 
exertions, William Smith completed that great achievement, 
the geological map of Great Britain; meanwhile, the 
Ordnance Survey — a very accurate and elaborate one, it 
is true — has already occupied a large staff for some two 
generations, and will not be completed before the lapse of 
another. Howard and the prisons of Europe; Bianconi 
and Irish travelling ; Waghorn and the Overland route ; 
Dargan and the Dublin Exhibition — do not these suggest 
startling contrasts? While private gentlemen like Mr. 
Denison build model lodging-houses in which the deaths 
are greatly below the average, the State builds barracks 
in which the deaths are greatly above the average, even 
of the much-pitied town-populations; barracks which, 
though filled with picked men under medical supervision, 
show an annual mortality per thousand of 13.6, 17.9 and 
even 20.4; though among civilians of the same age in the 
same places, the mortality per thousand is but 11.9. While 
the State has laid out large sums at Parkhurst in the 
effort to reform juvenile criminals, who are not reformed, 
Mr. Ellis takes fifteen of the worst young thieves in 
London — thieves considered by the police irreclaimable — 
and reforms them all. Side by side with the Emigration 
Board, under whose management hundreds die of fever 
from close packing, and under whose licence sail vessels 
which, like the Washington, are the homes of fraud, bru- 
tality, tyranny, and obscenity, stands Mrs. Chisholm's 
Family Colonization Loan Society, which does not provide 

* The political Corporation of London; not a private corporation. 
—Ed. 

OVER-LEGISLATION. 

149 

worse accommodation than ever before but much better; 
which does not demoralize by promiscuous crowding but 
improves by mild discipline ; which does not pauperize by 
charity but encourages providence ; which does not increase 
our taxes, but is self-supporting. Here are lessons for the 
lovers of legislation. The State outdone by a working shoe- 
maker ! The State beaten by a woman ! 

Stronger still becomes this contrast between the results 
of public action and private action, when we remember that 
the one is constantly eked out by the other, even in doing 
the things unavoidably left to it. Passing over military and 
naval departments, in which much is done by contractors 
and not by men receiving government pay, — passing over 
the Church, which is constantly extended not by law but 
by voluntary effort — passing over the universities, where 
the efficient teaching is given not by the appointed officers 
but by private tutors; let us look at the mode in which our 
judicial system is worked. Lawyers perpetually tell us that 
codification is impossible ; and some are simple enough to 
believe them. Merely remarking, in passing, that what 
government and all its employes cannot do for the Acts of 
Parliament in general, was done for the 1,500 Customs acts 
in 1825 by the energy of one man — Mr. Deacon Hume — let 
us see how the absence of a digested system of law is made 
good. In preparing themselves for the bar, and finally the 
bench, law-students, by years of research, have to gain an 
acquaintance with this vast mass of unorganized legisla- 
tion; and that organization which it is held impossible for 
the State to effect, it is held possible (sly sarcasm on the 
State!) for each student to effect for himself. Every judge 
can privately codify, though "united wisdom" cannot. But 
how is each judge enabled to codify ? By the private enter- 
prise of men who have prepared the way for him ; by the 
partial codifications of Blackstone, Coke, and others; by the 
digests of partnership-law, bankruptcy-law, law of patents, 
laws affecting women, and the rest that daily issue from 

150 

THE MAN VEESVS THE STATE. 

the press; by abstracts of cases, and volumes of reports — 
every one of them unofficial products. Sweep away all these 
fractional codifications made by individuals, and the State 
would be in utter ignorance of its own laws! Had not the 
bunglings of legislators been made good by private enter- 
prise, the administration of justice would have been im- 
possible ! 

Where, then, is the warrant for the constantly proposed 
extensions of legislative action? If, as we have seen in a 
large class of cases, government measures do not remedy 
the evils they aim at; if, in another large class, they make 
these evils worse instead of remedying them; and if, in a 
third large class, while curing some evils they entail others, 
and often greater ones; if, as we lately saw, public action 
is continually outdone in efficiency by private action; and 
if, as just shown, private action is obliged to make up for 
the shortcomings of public action, even in fulfilling the 
vital functions of the State ; what reason is there for wish- 
ing more public administrations? The advocates of such 
may claim credit for philanthropy, but not for wisdom; 
unless wisdom is shown by disregarding experience. 

V. 

"Much of this argument is beside the question," will 
rejoin our opponents. "The true point at issue is, not 
whether individuals and companies outdo the State when 
they come in competition with it, but whether there are not 
certain social wants which the State alone can satisfy. 
Admitting that private enterprise does much, and does it 
well, it is nevertheless true that we have daily thrust upon 
our notice many desiderata which it has not achieved, and 
is not achieving. In these cases its incompetency is obvious ; 
and in these cases, therefore, it behooves the State to make 
up for its deficiencies: doing this, if not well, yet as well 
as it can." 

Not to fall back upon the many experiences already 

OVEB-LEGISLATION. 

151 

quoted, showing that the State is likely to do more harm 
than good in attempting this; nor to dwell upon the fact 
that, in most of the alleged cases, the apparent insufficiency 
of private enterprise is a result of previous State-inter- 
ferences, as may be conclusively shown ; let us deal with the 
proposition on its own terms. Though there would have 
been no need for a Mercantile Marine Act to prevent the 
unseaworthiness of ships and the ill-treatment of sailors, 
had there been no Navigation Laws to produce these; and 
though were all like cases of evils and shortcomings directly 
or indirectly produced by law, taken out of the category, 
there would probably remain but small basis for the plea 
above put ; yet let it be granted that, every artificial obstacle 
having been removed, there would still remain many desid- 
erata unachieved, which there was no seeing how sponta- 
neous effort could achieve. Let all this, we say, be granted ; 
the propriety of legislative action may yet be rightly 
questioned. 

For the said plea involves the unwarrantable assump- 
tion that social agencies will continue to work only as they 
are now working; and will produce no results but those 
they seem likely to produce. It is the habit of this school 
of thinkers to make a limited human intelligence the 
measure of phenomena which it requires omniscience to 
grasp. That which it does not see the way to, it does not 
believe will take place. Though society has, generation 
after generation, been growing to developments which none 
foresaw, yet there is no practical belief in unforeseen devel- 
opments in the future. The Parliamentary debates consti- 
tute an elaborate balancing of probabilities, having for 
data things as they are. Meanwhile every day adds new 
elements to things as they are, and seemingly improbable 
results constantly occur. Who, a few years ago, expected 
that a Leicester Square refugee would shortly become 
Emperor of the French? Who looked for free trade from 
a landlords' Ministry? Who dreamed that Irish over- 

152 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

population would spontaneously cure itself, as it is now 
doing? So far from social changes arising in likely ways, 
they usually arise in ways which, to common sense, appear 
unlikely. A barber's shop was not a probable-looking place 
for the germination of the cotton-manufacture. No one 
supposed that important agricultural improvements would 
come from a Leadenhall Street tradesman. A farmer 
would have been the last man thought of to bring to bear 
the screw-propulsion of steamships. The invention of a 
new species of architecture we should have hoped from any 
one rather than a gardener. Yet while the most unexpected 
changes are daily wrought out in the strangest ways, legis- 
lation daily assumes that things will go just as human 
foresight thinks they will go. Though by the trite exclama- 
tion, "What would our forefathers have said!" there is 
a frequent acknowledgment of the fact that wonderful 
results have been achieved in modes wholly unforeseen, yet 
there seems no belief that this will be again. Would it not 
be wise to admit such a probability into our politics ? May 
we not rationally infer that, as in the past, so in the future ? 

This strong faith in State-agencies is, however, accom- 
panied by so weak a faith in natural agencies (the two 
being antagonistic), that, in spite of past experience, it 
will by many be thought absurd to rest in the conviction 
that existing social needs will be spontaneously met, though 
we cannot say how they will be met. Nevertheless, illustra- 
tions exactly to the point are now transpiring before their 
eyes. Instance the scarcely credible phenomenon lately 
witnessed in the midland counties. Every one has heard 
of the distress of the stockingers; a chronic evil of some 
generation or two's standing. Repeated petitions have 
prayed Parliament for remedy; and legislation has made 
attempts, but without success. The disease seemed incura- 
ble. Two or three years since, however, the circular knitting 
machine was introduced ; a machine immensely outstripping 
the old stocking-frame in productiveness, but which can 

OVEE-LEGISLATION. 

153 

make only the legs of stockings, not the feet. Doubtless, 
the Leicester and Nottingham artisans regarded this new 
engine with alarm, as likely to intensify their miseries. On 
the contrary, it has wholly removed them. By cheapening 
production it has so enormously increased consumption, 
that the old stocking-frames, which were before too many 
by half for the work to be done, are now all employed in 
putting feet to the legs which the new machines make. How 
insane would he have been thought who anticipated cure 
from such a cause ! If from the unforeseen removal of evils 
we turn to the unforeseen achievement of desiderata, we 
find like cases. No one recognized in Oersted's electro- 
magnetic discovery the germ of a new agency for the catch- 
ing of criminals and the facilitation of commerce. No one 
expected railways to become agents for the diffusion of 
cheap literature, as they now are. No one supposed when 
the Society of Arts was planning an international exhibi- 
tion of manufacturers in Hyde Park, that the result would 
be a place for popular recreation and culture at Sydenham. 

But there is yet a deeper reply to the appeals of im- 
patient philanthropists. It is not simply that social 
vitality may be trusted by-and-by to fulfil each much- 
exaggerated requirement in some quiet spontaneous way — 
it is not simply that when thus naturally fulfilled it will 
be fulfilled efficiently, instead of being botched as when 
attempted artificially; but it is that until thus naturally 
fulfilled it ought not to be fulfilled at all. A startling para- 
dox, this, to many; but one quite justifiable, as we hope 
shortly to show. 

It was pointed out some distance back, that the force 
which produces and sets in motion every social mechanism 
— governmental, mercantile, or other — is some accumulation 
of personal desires. As there is no individual action with- 
out a desire, so, it was urged, there can be no social action 
without an aggregate of desires. To which there here 
remains to add, that as it is a general law of the individual 

154 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

that the intenser desires — those corresponding to all-essen- 
tial functions — are satisfied first, and if need be to the 
neglect of the weaker and less important ones; so, it must 
be a general law of society that the chief requisites of social 
life — those necessary to popular existence and multiplica- 
tion— will, in the natural order of things, be subserved 
before those of a less pressing kind. As the private man 
first ensures himself food; then clothing and shelter; these 
being secured, takes a wife; and, if he can afford it, pres- 
ently supplies himself with carpeted rooms, and a piano, 
and wines, hires servants and gives dinner-parties; so, in 
the evolution of society, we see first a combination for 
defence against enemies, and for the better pursuit of game ; 
by-and-by come such political arrangements as are needed 
to maintain this combination; afterwards, under a demand 
for more food, more clothes, more houses, arises division 
of labor; and when satisfaction of the animal wants has 
been provided for, there slowly grow up literature, science, 
and the arte. Is it not obvious that these successive evolu- 
tions occur in the order of their importance? Is it not 
obvious, that, being each of them produced by an aggregate 
of desires, they must occur in the order of their importance, 
if it be a law of the individual that the strongest desires 
correspond to the most needful actions? Is it not, indeed, 
obvious that the order of relative importance will be more 
uniformly followed in social action than in individual 
action ; seeing that the personal idiosyncrasies which disturb 
that order in the latter case are averaged in the former? 
If any one does not see this, let him take up a book 
describing life at the gold-diggings. There he will find the 
whole process exhibited in little. He will read that as the 
diggers must eat, they are compelled to offer such prices 
for food that it pays better to keep a store than to dig. 
As the store-keepers must get supplies, they give enormous 
sums for carriage from the nearest town; and some men, 
quickly seeing they can get rich at that, make it their busi- 

OVER-LEGISLATION. 

155 

ness. This brings drays and horses into demand; the high 
rates draw these from all quarters; and, after them, wheel- 
wrights and harness-makers. Blacksmiths to sharpen 
pickaxes, doctors to cure fevers, get pay exorbitant in pro- 
portion to the need for them; and are so brought flocking 
in proportionate numbers. Presently commodities become 
scarce; more must be fetched from abroad; sailors must 
have increased wages to prevent them from deserting and 
turning miners ; this necessitates higher charges for freight ; 
higher freights quickly bring more ships; and so there 
rapidly develops an organization for supplying goods from 
all parts of the world. Every phase of this evolution takes 
place in the order of its necessity; or, as we say, in the 
order of the intensity of the desires subserved. Each man 
does that which he finds pays best; that which pays best 
is that for which other men will give most; that for which 
they will give most is that which, under the circumstances, 
they most desire. Hence the succession must be through- 
out from the most important to the less important. A 
requirement which at any period remains unfulfilled, must 
be one for the fulfilment of which men will not pay so 
much as to make it worth any one's while to fulfil it — must 
be a less requirement than all the others for the fulfilment 
of which they will pay more; and must wait until other 
more needful things are done. Well, is it not clear that 
the same law holds good in every community? Is it not 
true of the latter phases of social evolution, as of the earlier, 
that when things are let alone the smaller desiderata will 
be postponed to the greater ? 

Hence, then, the justification of the seeming paradox, 
that until spontaneously fulfilled, a public want should not 
be fulfilled at all. It must, on the average, result in our 
complex state, as in simpler ones, that the thing left undone 
is a thing by doing which citizens cannot gain so much as 
by doing other things; is therefore a thing which society 
does not want done so much as it wants these other things 

156 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

done; and the corollary is, that to effect a neglected thing 
by artificially employing citizens to do it, is to leave undone 
some more important thing which they would have been 
doing; is to sacrifice the greater requisite to the smaller. 

"But," it will perhaps be objected, "if the things done 
by a government, or at least by a representative govern- 
ment, are also done in obedience to some aggregate desire, 
why may we not look for this normal subordination of the 
more needful to the less needful in them too?" The reply 
is, that though they have a certain tendency to follow this 
order; though those primal desires for public defence and 
personal protection, out of which government originates, 
were satisfied through its instrumentality in proper suc- 
cession; though, possibly, some other early and simple re- 
quirements may have been so too; yet, when the desires 
are not few, universal and intense, but, like those remaining 
to be satisfied in the latter stages of civilization, numerous, 
partial, and moderate, the judgment of a government is no 
longer to be trusted. To select out of an immense number 
of minor wants, physical, intellectual, and moral, felt in 
different degrees by different classes, and by a total mass 
varying in every case, the want that is most pressing, is a 
task which no legislature can accomplish. No man or men 
by inspecting society can see what it most needs; society 
must be left to feel what it most needs. The mode of solu- 
tion must be experimental, not theoretical. When left, day 
after day, to experience evils and dissatisfactions of various 
kinds, affecting them in various degrees, citizens gradually 
acquire repugnance to these proportionate to their great- 
ness, and corresponding desires to get rid of them, which 
by spontaneously fostering remedial agencies are likely to 
end in the worst inconvenience being first removed. And 
however irregular this process may be (and we admit that 
men's habits and prejudices produce many anomalies, or 
seeming anomalies, in it) it is a process far more trust- 
worthy than are legislative judgments. For those who 

OVEE-LEGISLATION. 

157 

question this, there are instances ; and, that the parallel may 
be the more conclusive, we will take a case in which the 
ruling power is deemed specially fit to decide. We refer 
to our means of communication. 

Do those who maintain that railways would have been 
better laid out and constructed by government, hold that 
the order of importance would have been as uniformly fol- 
lowed as it has been by private enterprise? Under the 
stimulus of an enormous traffic — a traffic too great for the 
then existing means — the first line sprung up between 
Liverpool and Manchester. Next came the Grand Junction 
and the London and Birmingham (now merged in the Lon- 
don and Northwestern) ; afterwards the Great Western, 
the Southwestern, the Southeastern, the Eastern Counties, 
the Midland. Since then subsidiary lines and branches have 
occupied our capitalists. As they were quite certain to do, 
companies made first the most needed, and therefore the 
best paying, lines; under the same impulse that a laborer 
chooses high wages in preference to low. That government 
would have adopted a better order can hardly be, for the 
best has been followed; but that it would have adopted a 
worse, all the evidence we have goes to show. In default 
of materials for a direct parallel, we might cite from India 
and the colonies, cases of injudicious road-making. Or, as 
exemplifying State-efforts to facilitate communication, we 
might dwell on the fact that while our rulers have sacri- 
ficed hundreds of lives and spent untold treasure in seeking 
a Northwest passage, which would be useless if found, they 
have left the exploration of the Isthmus of Panama, and 
the making of railways and canals through it, to private 
companies. But, not to make much of this indirect evi- 
dence, we will content ourselves with the one sample of a 
State-made channel for commerce, which we have at home 
— the Caledonian Canal. Up to the present time (1853), 
this public work has cost upwards of £1,100,000. It has 
now been open for many years, and salaried emissaries have 

158 

THE MAN VEESU8 THE STATE. 

been constantly employed to get traffic for it. The results, 
as given in its forty-seventh annual report, issued in 1852, 
are — receipts during the year, £7,909 ; expenditure ditto, 
£9,261 ; loss, £1,352. Has any such large investment been 
made with such a pitiful result by a private canal company ? 

And if a government is so bad a judge of the relative 
importance of social requirements, when these requirements 
are of the same kind, how worthless a judge must it be when 
they are of different kinds. If, where a fair share of intelli- 
gence might be expected to lead them right, legislators and 
their officers go so wrong, how terribly will they err where 
no amount of intelligence would suffice them, — where they 
must decide among hosts of needs, bodily, intellectual, and 
moral, which admit of no direct comparisons; and how dis- 
astrous must be the results if they act out their erroneous 
decisions. Should any one need this bringing home to him 
by an illustration, let him read the following extract from 
the last of the series of letters some time since published in 
the Morning Chronicle, on the state of agriculture in France. 
After expressing the opinion that French farming is some 
century behind English farming, the writer goes on to say: 

There are two causes principally chargeable with this. In the 
first place, strange as it may seem in a country in which two-thirds 
of the population are agriculturists, agriculture is a very unhon- 
oured occupation. Develop in the slightest degree a Frenchman's 
mental faculties, and he flies to a town as surely as steel filings 
fly to a loadstone. He has no rural tastes, no delight in rural 
habits. A French amateur farmer would indeed be a sight to see. 
Again, this national tendency is directly encouraged by the cen- 
tralizing system of government — by the multitude of officials, and 
by the payment of all functionaries. From all parts of France, 
men of great energy and resource struggle up, and fling them- 
selves on the world of Paris. There they try to become great 
functionaries. Through every department * of the eighty-four, men 
of less energy and resource struggle up to the chef -lieu— the 
provincial capital. There they try to become little functionaries. 

* The departments are political subdivisions, created by redisricting 
the old provinces of France. — Ed. 

OVEE-LEGISLATION. 

159 

Go still lower — deal with a still smaller scale — and the result will 
be the same. As is the department to France, so is the arrondisse- 
ment to the department, and the commune to the arrondissement. 
All who have, or think they have, heads on their shoulders, struggle 
into towns to fight for office. All who are, or are deemed by 
themselves or others, too stupid for anything else, are left at home 
to till the fields, and breed the cattle, and prune the bines, as 
their ancestors did for generations before them. Thus there is 
actually no intelligence left in the country. The whole energy, 
and knowledge, and resource of the land are barreled up in the 
towns. You leave one city, and in many cases you will not meet 
an educated or cultivated individual until you arrive at another; 
all between is utter intellectual barrenness. 

To what end now is this constant abstraction of able men 
from rural districts? To the end that there may be enough 
functionaries to achieve those many desiderata which French 
Governments have thought ought to be achieved — to provide 
amusements, to manage mines, to construct roads and 
bridges, to erect numerous buildings ; to print books, encour- 
age the fine arts, control this trade, and inspect that manu- 
facture ; to do all the hundred-and-one things which the 
State does in France. That the army of officers needed for 
this may be maintained, agriculture must go unofficered. 
That certain social conveniences may be better secured, the 
chief social necessity is neglected. The very basis of the 
national life is sapped, to gain a few non-essential advan- 
tages. Said we not truly, then, that until a requirement is 
spontaneously fulfilled, it should not be fulfilled at all? 

VI. 

And here indeed we may recognize the close kinship be- 
tween the fundamental fallacy involved in these State-med- 
dlings and the fallacy lately exploded by the free-trade 
agitation. These various law-made instrumentalities for 
effecting ends which might otherwise not yet be effected, all 
embody a subtler form of the protectionist hypothesis. The 
same short-sightedness which, looking at commerce, pre- 

160 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

scribed bounties and restrictions, looking at social affairs in 
general, prescribes these multiplied administrations ; and the 
same criticism applies alike to all its proceedings. 

For was not the error that vitiated every law aiming at 
the artificial maintenance of a trade, substantially that which 
we have just been dwelling upon; namely, this overlooking 
of the fact that, in setting people to do one thing, some other 
thing is inevitably left undone ? The statesmen who thought 
it wise to protect home-made silks against French silks, did 
so under the impression that the manufacture thus secured 
constituted a pure gain to the nation. They did not reflect 
that the men employed in this manufacture would otherwise 
have been producing something else ; a something else which, 
as they could produce it without legal help, they could more 
profitably produce. Landlords who have been so anxious to 
prevent foreign wheat from displacing their own wheat, have 
never duly realized the fact that if their fields would not 
yield wheat so economically as to prevent the feared dis- 
placement, it simply proved that they were growing unfit 
crops in place of fit crops; and so working their land at a 
relative loss. In all cases where, by restrictive duties, a 
trade has been upheld that would otherwise not have existed, 
capital has been turned into a channel less productive than 
some other into which it would naturally have flowed. And 
so, to pursue certain State-patronized occupations, men have 
been drawn from more advantageous occupations. 

Clearly then, as above alleged, the same oversight runs 
through all these interferences; be they with commerce, or 
be they with other things. In employing people to achieve 
this or that desideratum, legislators have not perceived that 
they were thereby preventing the achievement of some other 
desideratum. They have habitually assumed that each pro- 
posed good would, if secured, be a pure good, instead of 
being a good purchasable only by submission to some evil 
which would else have been remedied; and, making this 
error, have injuriously diverted men's labor. As in trade, 

OVEB-LEGISLATION. 

161 

so in other things, labor will spontaneously find out, better 
than any government can find out for it, the things on which 
it may best expend itself. Rightly regarded, the two propo- 
sitions are identical. This division into commercial and non- 
commercial affairs is quite a superficial one. All the actions 
going on in society come under the generalization: human 
effort ministering to human desire. Whether the ministra- 
tion be effected through a process of buying and selling, or 
whether in any other way, matters not so far as the general 
law of it is concerned. In all cases it must be true that the 
stronger desires will get themselves satisfied before the 
weaker ones ; and in all cases it must be true that to get sat- 
isfaction for the weaker ones before they would naturally 
have it, is to deny satisfaction to the stronger ones. 

VII. 

To the immense positive evils entailed by over-legislation 
have to be added the equally great negative evils; evils 
which, notwithstanding their greatness, are scarcely at all 
recognized, even by the far-seeing. "While the State does 
those things which it ought not to do, as an inevitable conse- 
quence, it leaves undone those things which it ought to do. 
Time and activity being limited, it necessarily follows that 
legislators' sins of commission entail sins of omission. Mis- 
chievous meddling involves disastrous neglect; and until 
statesmen are ubiquitous and omnipotent, must ever do so. 
In the very nature of things an agency employed for two 
purposes must fulfil both imperfectly; partly because while 
fulfilling the one it cannot be fulfilling the other, and partly, 
because its adaptation to both ends implies incomplete fitness 
for either. As has been well said a propos of this point, "A 
blade which is designed both to shave and to carve, will 
certainly not shave so well as a razor or carve so well as a 
carving-knife. An academy of painting, which should also 
be a bank, would in all probability exhibit very bad pic- 
tures and discount very bad bills. A gas-company, which 

162 

THE MAN VEESUS THE STATE. 

should also be an infant-school society, would, we apprehend, 
light the streets ill, and teach the children ill." And if an 
institution undertakes, not two functions but a score; if a 
government, whose office it is to defend citizens against ag- 
gressors, foreign and domestic, engages also to disseminate 
Christianity, to administer charity, to teach children their 
lessons, to adjust prices of food, to inspect coal-mines, to 
regulate railways, to superintend house-building, to arrange 
cab-fares, to look into people 's stink-traps, to vaccinate their 
children, to send out emigrants, to prescribe hours of labor, 
to examine lodging-houses, to test the knowledge of mercan- 
tile captains, to provide public libraries, to read and author- 
ize dramas, to inspect passenger-ships, to see that small 
dwellings are supplied with water, to regulate endless things 
from a banker 's issues down to the boat-fares on the Serpen- 
tine; is it not manifest that its primary duty must be ill- 
discharged in proportion to the multiplicity of affairs it 
busies itself with? Must not its time and energies be frit- 
tered away in schemes, and inquiries, and amendments, in 
discussions, and divisions, to the neglect of its essential busi- 
ness ? And does not a glance over the debates make it clear 
that this is the fact ? and that, while Parliament and public 
are alike occupied with these mischievous interferences, these 
Utopian hopes, the one thing needful is left almost undone ? 

See here, then, the proximate cause of our legal abomina- 
tions. We drop the substance in our efforts to catch shadows. 
While our firesides and clubs and taverns are filled with talk 
about corn-law questions, and church questions, and educa- 
tion questions, and poor-law questions — all of them raised 
by over-legislation — the justice-question gets scarcely any 
attention; and we daily submit to be oppressed, cheated, 
robbed. This institution which should succor the man who 
has fallen among thieves, turns him over to solicitors, bar- 
risters, and a legion of law-officers; drains his purse for 
writs, briefs, affidavits, subpoenas, fees of all kinds and ex- 
penses innumerable ; involves him in the intricacies of com- 

OVER- LEGISLATION. 

163 

mon courts, chancery-courts, suits, counter-suits, and ap- 
peals; and often ruins where it should aid. Meanwhile, 
meetings are called and leading articles written and votes 
asked and societies formed and agitations carried on, not 
to rectify these gigantic evils, but partly to abolish our an- 
cestors' mischievous meddlings and partly to establish med- 
dlings of our own. Is it not obvious that this fatal neglect 
is a result of this mistaken officiousness ? Suppose that ex- 
ternal and internal protection had been the sole recognized 
functions of the ruling powers: is it conceivable that our 
administration of justice would have been as corrupt as 
now ? Can any one believe that had Parliamentary elections 
been habitually contested on questions of legal reform, our 
judicial system would still have been what Sir John Romilly 
calls it, "a technical system invented for the creation of 
costs " ? * Does any one suppose that, if the efficient defence 
of person and property had been the constant subject-matter 
of hustings pledges, we should yet be waylaid by a Chancery 
court which has now more than two hundred millions of 
property in its clutches; which keeps suits pending fifty 
years, until all the funds are gone in fees; which swallows 
in costs two millions annually? Dare any one assert that 
had constituencies been always canvassed on principles of 
law-reform versus law-conservatism, ecclesiastical courts 
would have continued for centuries fattening on the goods of 
widows and orphans ? The questions are next to absurd. A 
child may see that with the general knowledge people have 
of legal corruptions and the universal detestation of legal 
atrocities, an end would long since have been put to them, 
had the administration of justice always been the political 
topic. Had not the public mind been constantly preoccu- 
pied, it could never have been tolerated that a man neglect- 
ing to file an answer to a bill in due' course, should be 
imprisoned fifteen years' for contempt of court, as Mr. James 
Taylor was. It would have been impossible that, on the 

* Campaign promises.' — Ed. 

164 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

abolition of their sinecures, the sworn-clerks should have 
been compensated by the continuance of their exorbitant in- 
comes, not only till death, but for seven years after, at a 
total estimated cost of £700,000. Were the State confined to 
its defensive and judicial functions, not only the people but 
legislators themselves would agitate against abuses. The 
sphere of activity and the opportunities for distinction being 
narrowed, all the thought and industry and eloquence which 
members of Parliament now expend on impracticable 
schemes and artificial grievances, would be expended in ren- 
dering justice pure, certain, prompt, and cheap. The com- 
plicated follies of our legal verbiage, which the uninitiated 
cannot understand and which the initiated interpret in vari- 
ous senses, would be quickly put an end to. We should no 
longer frequently hear of Acts of Parliament so bunglingly 
drawn up that it requires half a dozen actions and judges' 
decisions under them, before even lawyers can say how they 
apply. There would be no such stupidly-designed measures 
as the Railway Winding-up Act, which, though passed in 
1846 to close the accounts of the bubble-schemes* of the 
mania, leaves, them still unsettled in 1854 ; which, even with 
funds in hand, withholds payment from creditors whose 
claims have been years since admitted. Lawyers would no 
longer be suffered to maintain and to complicate the present 
absurd system of land-titles, which, besides the litigation and 
loss it perpetually causes, lowers the value of estates, pre- 
vents the ready application of capital to them, checks the 
development of agriculture, and thus hinders the improve- 
ment of the peasantry and the prosperity of the country. In 
short, the corruptions, follies, and terrors of law would 
cease; and that which men now shrink from as an enemy 
they would come to regard as what it purports to be — a 
friend. 

How vast then is the negative evil which, in addition to 
the positive evils before enumerated, this meddling policy 

* A mania of speculation in railway-stocks. — Ed. 

OVER-LEGISLATION. 

165 

entails on us ! How many are the grievances men bear, from 
which they would otherwise be free ! Who is there that has 
not submitted to injuries rather than run the risk of heavy 
law-costs ? Who is there that has not abandoned just claims 
rather than "throw good money after bad"? Who is there 
that has not paid unjust demands rather than withstand the 
threat of an action? This man can point to property that 
has been alienated from his family from lack of funds or 
courage to fight for it. That man can name several relations 
ruined by a law-suit. Here is a lawyer who has grown rich 
on the hard earnings of the needy and the savings of the 
oppressed. There is a once-wealthy trader who has been 
brought by legal iniquities to the workhouse or the lunatic 
asylum. The badness of our judicial system vitiates our 
whole social life: renders almost every family poorer than 
it would otherwise be ; hampers almost every business trans- 
action ; inflicts daily anxieties on every trader. And all this 
loss of property, time, temper, comfort, men quietly submit 
to from being absorbed in the pursuit of schemes which even- 
tually bring on them other mischiefs. 

Nay, the case is even worse. It is distinctly provable 
that many of these evils about which outcries are raised, and 
to cure which special Acts of Parliament are loudly invoked, 
are themselves produced by our disgraceful judicial system. 
For example, it is well known that the horrors out of which 
our sanitary agitators make political capital, are found in 
their greatest intensity on properties that have been for a 
generation in Chancery ; are distinctly traceable to the ruin 
thus brought about; and would never have existed but for 
the infamous corruptions of law. Again, it has been shown 
that the long-drawn miseries of Ireland, which have been 
the subject of endless legislation, have been mainly produced 
by inequitable land-tenure and the complicated system of 
entail : a system which wrought such involvements as to pre- 
vent sales; which practically negatived all improvement; 
which brought landlords to the workhouse; and which re- 

166 

THE MAN VEESUS THE STATE. 

quired an Incumbered Estates Act to cut its Gordian knots 
and render the proper cultivation of the soil possible. 
Judicial negligence, too, is the main cause of railway- 
accidents. If the State would fulfil its true function, by 
giving passengers an easy remedy for breach of contract 
when trains are behind time, it would do more to prevent 
accidents than can be done by the minutest inspection or 
the most cunningly-devised regulations; for it is notorious 
that the majority of accidents are primarily caused by ir- 
regularity. In the case of bad house-building, also, it is 
obvious that a cheap, rigorous, and certain administration 
of justice, would make Building Acts needless. For is not 
the man who erects a house of bad materials ill put together, 
and, concealing these with papering and plaster, sells it as 
a substantial dwelling, guilty of fraud? And should not 
the law recognize this fraud as it does in the analogous case 
of an unsound horse? And if the legal remedy were easy, 
prompt, and sure, would not builders cease transgressing? 
So is it in other cases; the evils which men perpetually call 
on the State to cure by superintendence, themselves arise 
from non-performance of its original duty. 

See then how this vicious policy complicates itself. Not 
only does meddling legislation fail to cure the evils it aims 
at ; not only does it make many evils worse ; not only does it 
create new evils greater than the old; but while doing this 
it entails on men the oppressions, robberies, ruin, which flow 
from the non-administration of justice. And not only to the 
positive evils does it add this vast negative one, but this 
again, by fostering many social abuses that would not else 
exist, furnishes occasions for more meddlings which again 
act and react in the same way. And thus as ever, "things 
bad begun make strong themselves by ill." 

vm. 

After assigning reasons, thus fundamental, for condemn- 
ing all State-action save that which universal experience has 

OVEK-LEGISLATION. 

167 

proved to be absolutely needful, it would seem superfluous 
to assign subordinate ones. Were it called for, we might, 
taking for text Mr. Lindsay's work on Navigation and Mer- 
cantile Marine Law, say much upon the complexity to which 
this process of adding regulation to regulation — each necessi- 
tated by foregoing ones — ultimately leads: a complexity 
which, by the misunderstandings, delays, and disputes it 
entails, greatly hampers our social life. Something, too, 
might be added upon the perturbing effects of that "gross 
delusion," as M. Guizot calls it, "a belief in the sovereign 
power of political machinery ' ' — a delusion to which he partly 
ascribes the late revolution in France ; and a delusion which 
is fostered by every new interference. But, passing over 
these, we would dwell for a short space upon the national 
enervation which this State-superintendence produces. 

The enthusiastic philanthropist, urgent for some Act of 
Parliament to remedy this evil or secure the other good, 
thinks it a trivial and far-fetched objection that the people 
will be morally injured by doing things for them instead of 
leaving them to do things themselves. He vividly conceives 
the benefit he hopes to get achieved, which is a positive and 
readily-imaginable thing. He does not conceive the diffused, 
invisible, and slowly-accumulating effect wrought on the 
popular mind, and so does not believe in it ; or, if he admits 
it, thinks it beneath consideration. "Would he but remember, 
however, that all national character is gradually produced 
by the daily action of circumstances, of which each day's 
result seems so insignificant as not to be worth mentioning, 
he would perceive that what is trifling when viewed in its 
increments may be formidable when viewed in its total. Or 
if he would go into the nursery, and watch how repeated 
actions — each of them apparently unimportant, — create, in 
the end, a habit which will affect the whole future life, he 
would be reminded that every influence brought to bear on 
human nature tells, and, if continued, tells seriously. The 

168 

THE MAN VEBSUS THE STATE. 

thoughtless mother who hourly yields to the requests, "Mam- 
ma, tie my pinafore," "Mamma, button my shoe," and the 
like, cannot be persuaded that each of these concessions is 
detrimental; but the wiser spectator sees that if this policy 
be long pursued, and be extended to other things, it will end 
in inaptitude. The teacher of the old school who showed his 
pupil the way out of every difficulty, did not perceive that 
he was generating an attitude of mind greatly militating 
against success in life. The modern teacher, however, in- 
duces his pupil to solve his difficulties himself; believes that 
in so doing he is preparing him to meet the difficulties which, 
when he goes into the world, there will be no one to help him 
through; and finds confirmation for this belief in the fact 
that a great proportion of the most successful men are self- 
made. Well, is it not obvious that this relationship between 
discipline and success holds good nationally ? Are not nations 
made of men; and are not men subject to the same laws of 
modification in their adult years as in their early years? 
Is it not true of the drunkard, that each carouse adds a 
thread to his bonds? of the trader, that each acquisition 
strengthens the wish for acquisitions? of the pauper, that 
the more you assist him the more he wants ? of the busy man, 
that the more he has to do the more he can do? And does 
it not follow that if every individual is subject to this process 
of adaptation to conditions, a whole nation must be so ; that 
just in proportion as its members are little helped by ex- 
traneous power they will become self -helping, and in propor- 
tion as they are much helped they will become helpless? 
What folly is it to ignore these results because they are not 
direct and not immediately visible. Though slowly wrought 
out, they are inevitable. We can no more elude the laws of 
human development than we can elude the law of gravita- 
tion ; and so long as they hold true must these effects occur. 

If we are asked in what special directions this alleged 
helplessness, entailed by much state-superintendence, shows 
itself, we reply that it is seen in a retardation of all social 

OVEE-LEGISLATION. 

169 

growths requiring self-confidence in the people ; in a timidity 
that fears all difficulties not before encountered; in a 
thoughtless contentment with things as they are. Let any 
one, after duly watching the rapid evolution going on in 
England, where men have been comparatively little helped 
by governments — or better still, after contemplating the un- 
paralleled progress of the United States, which is peopled 
by self-made men, and the recent descendants of self-made 
men — let such an one, we say, go on to the Continent, and 
consider the relatively slow advance which things are there 
making; and the still slower advance they would make but 
for English enterprise. Let him go to Holland and see that 
though the Dutch early showed themselves good mechanics, 
and have had abundant practice in hydraulics, Amsterdam 
has been without any due supply of water until now that 
works are being established by an English company. Let 
him go to Berlin and there be told that, to give that city a 
water-supply such as London has had for generations, the 
project of an English firm is about to be executed by English 
capital, under English superintendence. Let him go to 
Vienna and learn that it, in common with other continental 
cities, is lighted by an English gas-company. Let him go 
on the Khone, on the Loire, on the Danube, and discover that 
Englishmen established steam navigation on those rivers. 
Let him inquire concerning the railways in Italy, Spain, 
France, Sweden, Denmark, how many of them are English 
projects, how many have been largely helped by English 
capital, how many have been executed by English contrac- 
tors, how many have had English engineers. Let him dis- 
cover, too, as he will, that where railways have been govern- 
ment-made, as in Russia, the energy, the perseverance, and 
the practical talent developed in England and the United 
States have been called in to aid. And then if these illus- 
trations of the progressiveness of a self-dependent race, and 
the torpidity of paternally-governed ones, do not suffice 
him, he may read Mr. Laing's successive volumes of Euro- 

170 THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

pean travel, and there study the contrast in detail. What, 
now, is the cause of this contrast? In the order of nature, 
a capacity for self-help must in every case have been brought 
into existence by the practice of self-help ; and, other things 
equal, a lack of this capacity must in every case have arisen 
from the lack of demand for it. Do not these two ante- 
cedents and their two consequents agree with the facts as 
presented in England and Europe? Were not the inhabi- 
tants of the two, some centuries ago, much upon a par in 
point of enterprise? Were not the English even behind in 
their manufactures, in their colonization, in their com- 
merce? Has not the immense relative change the English 
have undergone in this respect, been coincident with the 
great relative self-dependence they have been since ha- 
bituated to ? And has not the one been caused by the other ? 
Whoever doubts it, is asked to assign a more probable cause. 
Whoever admits it, must admit that the enervation of a 
people by perpetual State-aids is not a trifling consideration, 
but the most weighty consideration. A general arrest of 
national growth he will see to be an evil greater than any 
special benefits can compensate for. And, indeed, when, 
after contemplating this great fact, the over-spreading of the 
earth by the English, he remarks the absence of any parallel 
achievement by a continental race ; when he reflects how this 
difference must depend chiefly on difference of character, 
and how such difference of character has been mainly pro- 
duced by difference of discipline; he will perceive that the 
policy pursued in this matter may have a large share in de- 
termining a nation's ultimate fate. 

IX. 

We are not sanguine, however, that argument will change 
the convictions of those who put their trust in legislation. 
With men of a certain order of thought the foregoing rea- 
sons will have weight. With men of another order of 
thought they will have little or none; nor would any accu- 

OVER-LEGISLATION. 

171 

mulation of such reasons affect them. The truth that ex- 
perience teaches has its limits. The experiences which teach 
must be experiences which can be appreciated; and experi- 
ences exceeding a certain degree of complexity become in- 
appreciable to the majority. It is thus with most social 
phenomena. If we remember that for these two thousand 
years and more, mankind have been making regulations for 
commerce, which have all along been strangling some trades 
and killing others with kindness, and that though the proofs 
of this have been constantly before their eyes, they have only 
just discovered that they have been uniformly doing mis- 
chief; if we remember that even now only a small portion 
of them see this; we are taught that perpetually-repeated 
and ever-accumulating experiences will fail to teach, until 
there exist the mental conditions required for the assimila- 
tion of them. Nay, when they are assimilated, it is very im- 
perfectly. The truth they teach is only half understood, 
even by those supposed to understand it best. For example, 
Sir Robert Peel, in one of his last speeches, after describing 
the immensely increased consumption consequent on free 
trade, goes on to say: 

If, then, you can only continue that consumption; if, by your 
legislation, under the favor of Providence, you can maintain the 
demand for labor and make your trade and manufactures pros- 
perous; you are not only increasing the sum of human happiness, 
but are giving the agriculturists of this country the best chance 
of that increased demand which must contribute to their welfare. 
—Times, Feb. 22, 1850. 

Thus the prosperity really due to the abandonment of all 
legislation, is ascribed to a particular kind of legislation. 
"You can maintain the demand," he says; "you can make 
trade and manufactures prosperous;" whereas, the facts 
he quotes prove that they can do this only by doing 'nothing. 
The essential truth of the matter — that law had been doing 
immense harm, and that this prosperity resulted not from 
law but from the absence of law — is missed; and his faith 

172 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

in legislation in general, which should, by this experience, 
have been greatly shaken, seemingly remains as strong as 
ever. Here, again, is the House of Lords, apparently not 
yet believing in the relationship of supply and demand, 
adopting within these few weeks the standing order — 

That before the first reading of any bill for making any work 
in the construction of which compulsory power is sought to take 
thirty houses or more, inhabited by the labouring classes in any 
one parish or place, the promoters be required to deposit in the 
office of the clerk of the Parliaments a statement of the number, 
description, and situation of the said houses, the number (so far 
as they can be estimated) of persons to be displaced, and whether 
any, and what, provision is made in the bill for remedying the 
inconvenience likely to arise from such displacements. 

If, then, in the comparatively simple relationships of 
trade, the teachings of experience remain for so many ages 
unpereeived, and are so imperfectly apprehended when they 
are perceived, it is scarcely to be hoped that where all social 
phenomena — moral, intellectual, and physical — are involved, 
any due appreciation of the truths displayed will presently 
take place. The facts cannot yet get recognized as facts. As 
the alchemist attributed his successive disappointments to 
some disproportion in the ingredients, some impurity, or 
some too great temperature, and never to the futility of his 
process or the impossibility of his aim ; so, every failure of 
State-regulations the law-worshipper explains away as being 
caused by this trifling oversight, or that little mistake: all 
which oversights and mistakes he assures you will in future 
be avoided. Eluding the facts as he does after this fashion, 
volley after volley of them produce no effect. 

Indeed this faith in governments is in a certain sense 
organic; and can diminish only by being outgrown. From 
the time when rulers were thought demi-gods, there has been 
a gradual decline in men's estimates of their power. This 
decline is still in progress, and has still far to go. Doubtless, 
every increment of evidence furthers it in some degree, 

OVEK-LEGISLATION. 

173 

though not to the degree that at first appears. Only in 
so far as it modifies character does it produce a permanent 
effect. For while the mental type remains the same, the 
removal of a special error is inevitably followed by the 
growth of other errors of the same genus. All superstitions 
die hard; and we fear that this belief in government-om- 
nipotence will form no exception. 

THE GREAT POLITICAL SUPERSTITION. 

The great political superstition of the past was the divine 
right of kings The great political superstition of the present 
is the divine right of parliaments. The oil of anointing seems 
unawares to have dripped from the head of the one on to the 
heads of the many, and given sacredDess to them also and to 
their decrees. 

However irrational we mav think the earlier of these be- 
liefs. we must admit that it was more consistent than is the 
latter. "Whether we go back to times when the king was a 
god, or to times when he was a descendant of a god, or to 
times when he was god-appointed, we see good reason for 
passive obedience to his will When, as undei Louis XIY., 
theologians like Bossuet taught that kings "are gods, and 
share in a manner the Divine independence.'' or when it 
was thought, as by our own Tory party in old days, that " the 
monarch was the delegate of heaven ; " it is clear that, given 
the premise, the inevitable conclusion was that no bounds 
could be set to governmental commands But for the modern 
belief such a warrant does not exist Making no pretention 
to divine descent or divine appointment, a legislative body 
can show no supernatural justification for its claim to un- 
limited authority ; and no natural justification has ever been 
attempted. Hence, belief in its unlimited authority is with- 
out that consistency which of old characterized belief in a 
king's unlimited authority. 

It is curious how commonly men continue to hold in fact, 

THE GEEAT POLITICAL SUPEESTITION. 175 

doctrines which they have rejected in name — retaining the 
substance after thej have abandoned the form. In Theology 
an illustration is supplied by Carlyle, who, in his student days, 
giving up, as he thought, the creed of his fathers, rejected its 
shell only, keeping the contents ; and was proved by his con- 
ceptions of the world, and man, and conduct, to be still among 
the sternest of Scotch Calvinists. Similarly, Science furnishes 
an instance in one who united naturalism in Geology with 
supernaturalism in Biology — Sir Charles Lyell. "While, as 
the leading expositor of the unif ormitarian theory in Geology, 
he ignored only the Mosaic cosmogony, he long defended that 
belief in special creations of organic types, for which no other 
source than the Mosaic cosmogony could be assigned ; and 
only in the latter part of his lif e surrendered to the arguments 
of Mr. Darwin. In Politics, as above implied, we have an 
analogous case. The tacitly-asserted doctrine, common to 
Tories, Whigs, and Radicals, that governmental authority is 
unlimited, dates back to times when the law-giver was sup- 
posed to have a warrant from God ; and it survives still, 
though the belief that the law-giver has God's warrant has 
died out. " Oh, an Act of Parliament can do anything," is 
the reply made to a citizen who questions the legitimacy of 
some arbitrary State-interference; and the citizen stands 
paralyzed. It does not occur to him to ask the how, and the 
when, and the whence, of this asserted omnipotence bounded 
only by physical impossibilities. 

Here we will take leave to question it. In default of the 
justification, once logically valid, that the ruler on Earth being 
a deputy of the ruler in Heaven, submission to him in all 
things is a duty, let us ask what reason there is for asserting 
the duty of submission in all things to a ruling power, con- 
stitutional or republican, which has no Heavenly-derived su- 
premacy. Evidently this inquiry commits us to a criticism 
of past and present theories concerning political authority. 
To revive questions supposed to be long since settled, may be 
thought to need some apology ; but there is a sufficient apology 

176 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

in the implication above made clear, that the theory commonly 

accepted is ill-based or unbased. 

The notion of sovereignty is that which first presents 
itself; and a critical examination of this notion, as en- 
tertained by those who do not assume the supernatural 
origin of sovereignty, carries us back to the arguments of 
Hobbes. 

Let us grant Hobbes's postulate that, " during the time 
men live without a common power to keep them all in awe, 
they are in that condition which is called war .... of every 
man against every man ; "* though this is not true, since there 
are some small uncivilized societies in which, without any 
" common power to keep them all in awe," men maintain 
peace and harmony better than it is maintained in societies 
where such a power exists. Let us suppose him to be right, 
too, in assuming that the rise of a ruling man over associated 
men, results from their desires to preserve order among 
themselves ; though, in fact, it habitually arises from the 
need for subordination to a leader in war, defensive or 
offensive, and has originally no necessary, and often no act- 
ual, relation to the preservation of order among the combined 
individuals. Once more, let us admit the indefensible as- 
sumption that to escape the evils of chronic conflicts, which 
must otherwise continue among them, the members of a 
community enter into a " pact or covenant," by which they 
all bind themselves to surrender their primitive freedom of 
action, and subordinate themselves to the will of an autocrat 
agreed upon : f accepting, also, the implication that their 
descendants for ever are bound by the covenant which re- 
mote ancestors made for them. Let us, I say, not object to 
these data, but pass to the conclusions Hobbes draws. He 
says : — 

*T. Hobbes, Collected Works, vol. iii. pp. 112-13. 
f Ibid., p. 159. 

THE GEEAT POLITICAL SUPEESTITION. 177 

"For where no covenant hatb preceded, there hath no right been 
transferred, and every man has a right to everything ; and consequently, 
no action can be unjust. But when a covenant is made, then to break 
it is unjust : and the definition of injustice, is no other than the not 

performance of covenant Therefore before the names of just and 

unjust can have place, there must be some coercive power, to compel 
men equally to the performance of their covenants, by the terror of 
some punishment, greater than the benefit they expect by the breach of 
their covenant." * 

"Were people's characters in Hobbes's day really so bad as 
to warrant his assumption that none would perform their 
covenants in the absence of a coercive power and threatened 
penalties ? In our day " the names of just and unjust can 
have place " quite apart from recognition of any coercive 
power. Among my friends I could name several whom I 
would implicitly trust to perform their covenants without any 
" terror of such punishment ; " and over whom the require- 
ments of justice would be as imperative in the absence of a 
coercive power as in its presence. Merely noting, however, 
that this unwarranted assumption vitiates Hobbes's argument 
for State-authority, and accepting both his premises and con- 
clusion, we have to observe two significant implications. One 
is that State-authority as thus derived, is a means to an end, 
and has no validity save as subserving that end : if the end 
is not subserved, the authority, by the hypothesis, does not 
exist. The other is that the end for which the authority 
exists, as thus specified, is the enforcement of justice — the 
maintenance of equitable relations. The reasoning yields no 
warrant for other coercion over citizens than that which is 
required for preventing direct aggressions, and those indirect 
aggressions constituted by breaches of contract ; to which, if 
we add protection against external enemies, the entire func- 
tion implied by Hobbes's derivation of sovereign authority is 
comprehended. 

* Hobbes, Collected Works, vol, iii. pp. 130-1. 

178 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

Hobbes argued in the interests of absolute monarchy. 
His modern admirer, Austin, had for his aim to derive the 
authority of law from the unlimited sovereignty of one man, 
or a number of men, small or large compared with the whole 
community. Austin was originally in the army ; and it has 
been truly remarked that " the permanent traces left " may 
be seen in his Province of Jurisprudence. When, unde- 
terred by the exasperating pedantries — the endless distinc- 
tions and definitions and repetitions — which served but to 
hide his essential doctrines, we ascertain what these are, it 
becomes manifest that he assimilates civil authority to mili- 
tary authority ; taking for granted that the one, as the other, 
is above question in respect of both origin and range. To 
get justification for positive law, he takes us back to the abso- 
lute sovereignty of the power imposing it — a monarch, an 
aristocracy, or that larger body of men who have votes in a 
democracy ; for such a body also, he styles the sovereign, in 
contrast with the remaining portion of the community which, 
from incapacity or other cause, remains subject. And having 
affirmed, or, rather, taken for granted, the unlimited authori- 
ty of the body, simple or compound, small or large, which 
he styles sovereign, he, of course, has no difficulty in deduc- 
ing the legal validity of its edicts, which he calls positive 
law. But the problem is simply moved a step further back 
and there left unsolved. The true question is — Whence the 
sovereignty? What is the assignable warrant for this un- 
qualified supremacy assumed by one, or by a small number, 
or by a large number, over the rest ? A critic might fitly 
say — " We will dispense with your process of deriving 
positive law from unlimited sovereignty : the sequence is 
obvious enough. But first prove your unlimited sover- 
eignty." 

To this demand there is no response. Analyze his assump- 
tion, and the doctrine of Austin proves to have no better 
basis than that of Hobbes. In the absence of admitted divine 
descent or appointment, neither single-headed ruler nor 

THE GEEAT POLITICAL SUPEESTITION. 179 

many-Beaded ruler can produce such credentials as the claim 
to unlimited sovereignty implies. 

"But surely," will come in deafening chorus the reply, 
" there is the unquestionable right of the majority, which 
gives unquestionable right to the parliament it elects." 

Yes, now we are coming down to the root of the matter. 
The divine right of parliaments means the divine right of 
majorities. The fundamental assumption made by legislators 
and people alike, is that a majority has powers which have 
no bounds. This is the current theory which all accept 
without proof as a self-evident truth. Nevertheless, criticism 
will, I think, show that this current theory requires a radical 
modification. 

In an essay on " Railway Morals and Railway Policy," 
published in the Edinburgh Review for October, 1854, 1 had 
occasion to deal with the question of a majority's powers as 
exemplified in the conduct of public companies ; and I cannot 
better prepare the way for conclusions presently to be drawn, 
than by quoting a passage from it : — 

"Under whatever circumstances, or for whatever ends, a number of 
taen co-operate, it is held that if difference of opinion arises among 
them, justice requires that the will of the greater number shall be ex- 
ecuted rather than that of the smaller number; and this rule is sup- 
posed to be uniformly applicable, be the question at issue what it may. 
So confirmed is this conviction, and so little have the ethics of the 
matter been considered, that to most this mere suggestion of a doubt 
will cause some astonishment. Yet it needs but a brief analysis to 
show that the opinion is little better than a political superstition. 
Instances may readily be selected which prove, by reductio ad abmrdum, 
that the right of a majority is a purely conditional right, valid only 
within specific limits. Let us take a few. Suppose that at the general 
meeting of some philanthropic association, it was resolved that in addi- 
tion to relieving distress the association should employ home-mission- 
aries to preach down popery. Might the subscriptions of Catholics, 
who had joined the body with charitable views, be rightfully used for 
this end? Suppose that of the members of a book-club, the greater 
number, thinking that under existing circumstances rifle-practice was 
25 

180 

THE MAN VEESUS THE STATE. 

more important than reading, should decide to change the purpose of 
their union, and to apply the funds in hand for the purchase of powder, 
ball, and targets. Would the rest be bound by this decision? Suppose 
that under the excitement of news from Australia, the majority of a 
Freehold Land Society should determine, not simply to start in a body 
for the gold-diggings, but to use their accumulated capital to provide 
outfits. Would this appropriation of property be just to the minority ? 
and must these join the expedition? Scarcely anyone would venture 
an affirmative answer even to the first of these questions; much less to 
the others. And why ? Because everyone must perceive that by unit- 
ing himself with others, no man can equitably be betrayed into acta 
utterly foreign to the purpose for which he joined them. Each of these 
supposed minorities would properly reply to those seeking to coerce 
them: — 'We combined with you for a defined object; we gave money 
and time for the furtherance of that object; on all questions thence 
arising we tacitly agreed to conform to the will of the greater 
number; but we did not agree to conform on any other questions. 
If you induce us to join you by professing a certain end, and then 
undertake some other end of which we were not apprised, you obtain 
our support under false pretences ; you exceed the expressed or under- 
stood compact to which we committed ourselves; and we are no longer 
bound by your decisions.' Clearly this is the only rational interpreta- 
tion of the matter. The general principle underlying the right govern- 
ment of every incorporated body, is, that its members contract with 
one another severally to submit to the will of the majority in all 
matters concerning the fulfilment of the objects for which they are in- 
corporated; but in no others. To this extent only can the contract 
hold. For as it is implied in the very nature of a contract, that those 
entering into it must know what they contract to do ; and as those who 
unite with others for a specified object, cannot contemplate all the un- 
specified objects which it is hypothetically possible for the union to 
undertake ; it follows that the contract entered into cannot extend to 
such unspecified objects. And if there exists no expressed or under- 
stood contract between the union and its members respecting unspecified 
objects, then for the majority to coerce the minority into undertaking 
them, is nothing less than gross tyranny." 

Naturally, if such a confusion of ideas exists in respect 
of the powers of a majority where the deed of incorporation 
tacitly limits those powers, still more must there exist such 
a confusion where there has been no deed of incorporation. 
Nevertheless the same principle holds. I again emphasize 

THE GEEAT POLITICAL SUPEKSTITION. 181 

the proposition that the members of an incorporated body 
are bound " severally to submit to the will of the majority 
in all matters conceiving the f ulfilment of the objects for 
which they are incorporated ; but in no othersP And I 
contend that this holds of an incorporated nation as much as 
of an incorporated company. 

" Yes, but," comes the obvious rejoinder, " as there is no 
deed by which the members of a nation are incorporated — as 
there neither is, nor ever was, a specification of purposes for 
which the union was formed, there exist no limits ; and, con- 
sequently, the power of the majority is unlimited." 

Evidently it must be admitted that the hypothesis of a 
social contract, either under the shape assumed by Hobbes 
or under the shape assumed by Rousseau, is baseless. Nay 
more, it must be admitted that even had such a contract once 
been formed, it could not be binding on the posterity of those 
who formed it. Moreover, if any say that in the absence of 
those limitations to its powers which a deed of incorporation 
might imply, there is nothing to prevent a majority from 
imposing its will on a minority by force, assent must be given 
— an assent, however, joined with the comment that if the 
superior force of the majority is its justification, then the 
superior force of a despot backed by an adequate army, is 
also justified ; the problem lapses. What we here seek is 
some higher warrant for the subordination of minority to 
majority than that arising from inability to resist physical 
coercion. Even Austin, anxious as he is to establish the un- 
questionable authority of positive law, and assuming, as he 
does, an absolute sovereignty of some kind, monarchic, aristo- 
cratic, constitutional, or popular, as the source of its unques- 
tionable authority, is obliged, in the last resort, to admit a 
moral limit to its action over the community. While insist- 
ing, in pursuance of his rigid theory of sovereignty, that a 
sovereign body originating from the people " is legally free 
to abridge their political liberty, at its own pleasure or dis- 
cretion," he allows that " a government may be hindered by 

182 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

positive morality from abridging the political liberty which 
it leaves or grants to its subjects." * Hence, we have to find, 
not a physical justification, but a moral justification, for the 
supposed absolute power of the majority. 

This will at once draw forth the rejoinder — " Of course, 
in the absence of any agreement, with its implied limitations, 
the rule of the majority is unlimited ; because it is more just 
that the majority should have its way than that the minority 
should have its way." A very reasonable rejoinder this seems 
until there comes the re-rejoinder. "We may oppose to it the 
equally tenable proposition that, in the absence of an agree- 
ment, the supremacy of a majority over a minority does not 
exist at all. It is co-operation of some kind, from which 
there arises these powers and obligations of majority and 
minority ; and in the absence of any agreement to co-operate, 
such powers and obligations are also absent. 

Here the argument apparently ends in a dead lock. 
Under the existing condition of things, no moral origin seems 
assignable, either for the sovereignty of the majority or for 
the limitation of its sovereignty. But further consideration 
reveals a solution of the difficulty. For if, dismissing all 
thought of any hypothetical agreement to co-operate hereto- 
fore made, we ask what would be the agreement into which 
citizens would now enter with practical unanimity, we get a 
sufficiently clear answer; and with it a sufficiently clear 
justification for the rule of the majority inside a certain 
sphere but not outside that sphere. Let us first observe a 
few of the limitations which at once become apparent. 

Were all Englishmen now asked if they would agree to 
co-operate for the teaching of religion, and would give the 
majority power to fix the creed and the forms of worship, 
there would come a very emphatic " No " from a large part 
of them. If, in pursurance of a proposal to revive sumptuary 
laws, the inquiry were made whether they would bind them- 

* Tfte Province of Jurisprudence Determined. Second Edition, p. 241. 

THE GEEAT POLITICAL SUPEESTITION. 183 

selves to abide by tbe will of the majority in respect of the 
fashions and qualities of their clothes, nearly all of them 
would refuse. In like manner if (to take an actual question 
of the day) people were polled to ascertain whether, in 
respect of the beverages they drank, they would accept the 
decision of the greater number, certainly half, and probably 
more than half, would be unwilling. Similarly with respect 
to many other actions which most men now-a-days regard as 
of purely private concern. Whatever desire there might be 
to co-operate for carrying on, or regulating, such actions, 
would be far from a unanimous desire. Manifestly, then, had 
social co-operation to be commenced by ourselves, and had its 
purposes to be specified before consent to co-operate could be 
obtained, there would be large parts of human conduct in 
respect of which co-operation would be declined ; and in 
respect of which, consequently, no authority by the majority 
over the minority could be rightly exercised. 

Turn now to the converse question — For what ends would 
all men agree to co-operate ? None will deny that for resist- 
ing invasion the agreement would be practically unanimous. 
Excepting only the Quakers, who, having done highly useful 
work in their time, are now dying out, all would unite for 
defensive war (not, however, for offensive war) ; and they 
would, by so doing, tacitly bind themselves to conform to the 
will of the majority in respect of measures directed to that 
end. There would be practical unanimity, also, in the agree- 
ment to co-operate for defence against internal enemies as 
against external enemies. Omitting criminals, all must wish 
to have person and property adequately protected. Each 
citizen desires to preserve his life, to preserve things which 
conduce to maintenance and enjoyment of his life, and to 
preserve intact his liberties both of using these things and 
getting further such. It is obvious to him that he cannot do 
all this if he acts alone. Against foreign invaders he is 
powerless unless he combines with his fellows ; and the 
business of protecting himself against domestic invaders, if 

184 

THE MAX VEBSVS THE STATE. 

he did not similarly combine, would be alike onerous, danger- 
ous, and inefficient. In one other co-operation all are inter- 
ested— use of the territory they inhabit. Did the primitive 
communal ownership survive, there would survive the primi- 
tive communal control of the uses to be made of land by in- 
dividuals or by groups of them ; and decisions of the major- 
ity would rightly prevail respecting the terms on which 
portions of it might be employed for raising food, for 
making means of communication, and for other purposes. 
Even at present, though the matter has been complicated by 
the growth of private landownership, yet, since the State is 
still supreme owner (every landlord being in law a tenant of 
the Crown) able to resume possession, or authorize compul- 
sory purchase, at a fair price; the implication is that the 
will of the majority is valid respecting the modes in which, 
and conditions under which, parts of the surface or sub-sur- 
face, may be utilized : involving certain agreements made on 
behalf of the public with private persons and companies. 

Details are not needful here ; nor is it needful to discuss 
that border region lying between these two classes of cases, 
and to say how much is included in the last and how much 
is excluded with the first. For present purposes, it is suffi- 
cient to recognize the undeniable truth that there are numer- 
ous kinds of actions in respect of which men would not, if 
they were asked, agree with anything like unanimity to be 
bound by the will of the majority ; while there are some 
kinds of actions in respect of which they would almost 
unanimously agree to be thus bound. Here, then, we find a 
definite warrant for enforcing the will of the majority within 
certain limits, and a definite warrant for denying the author- 
ity of its will beyond those limits. 

But evidently, when analyzed, the question resolves itself 
into the further question — "What are the relative claims of 
the aggregate and of its units ? Are the rights of the com- 
munity universally valid against the individual ? or has the 
individual 6ome rights which are valid against the com- 

THE GREAT POLITICAL SUPERSTITION. 185 

munity? The judgment given on this point underlies the 
entire fabric of political convictions formed, and more 
especially those convictions which concern the proper sphere 
of government. Here, then, I propose to revive a dormant 
controversy, with the expectation of reaching a different con- 
clusion from that which is fashionable. 

Says Professor Jevons, in his work, The State in Relation 
to Labour, — " The first step must be to rid our minds of the 
idea that there are any such things in social matters as 
abstract rights." Of like character is the belief expressed 
by Mr. Matthew Arnold in his article on Copyright : — 
" An author has no natural right to a property in his produc- 
tion. But then neither has he a natural right to anything 
whatever which he may produce or acquire." * So, too, I 
recently read in a weekly journal of high repute, that " to 
explain once more that there is no such thing as * natural 
right ' would be a waste of philosophy." And the view ex- 
pressed in these extracts is commonly uttered by statesmen 
and lawyers in a way implying that only the unthinking 
masses hold any other. 

One might have expected that utterances to this effect 
would have been rendered less dogmatic by the knowledge 
that a whole school of legists on the Continent, maintains 
a belief diametrically opposed to that maintained by the 
English school. The idea of Isatur-recht is the root-idea of 
German jurisprudence. Now whatever may be the opinion 
held respecting German philosophy at large, it cannot be 
characterised as shallow. A doctrine current among a people 
distinguished above all others as laborious inquirers, and 
certainly not to be classed with superficial thinkers, should 
not be dismissed as though it were nothing more than a 
popular delusion. This, however, by the way. Along with 
the proposition denied in the above quotations, there goes a 

* Fortnightly Review, 1880, vol. xsvii. p. 322. 

186 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

counter-proposition affirmed. Let us see what it is ; and 
what results when we go behind it and seek its warrant. 

On reverting to Bentham, we find this counter-proposition 
openly expressed. He tells us that government fulfils its 
office " by creating rights which it confers upon individuals : 
rights of personal security ; rights of protection for honour ; 
rights of property ; " &c* "Were this doctrine asserted as 
following from the divine right of kings, there would be 
nothing in it manifestly incongruous. Did it come to us 
from ancient Peru, where the Ynca " was the source from 
which everything flowed ; " f or from Shoa (Abyssinia), where 
" of their persons and worldly substance he [the King] is 
absolute master ; " % or from Dahome, where " all men are 
slaves to the king ; " * it would be consistent enough. But 
Bentham, far from being an absolutist like Hobbes, wrote in 
the interests of popular rule. In his Constitutional Code \ 
he fixes the sovereignty in the whole people ; arguing that 
it is best " to give the sovereign power to the largest possible 
portion of those whose greatest happiness is the proper and 
chosen object," because " this proportion is more apt than 
any other that can be proposed " for achievement of that 
object. 

Mark, now, what happens when we put these two doc- 
trines together. The sovereign people jointly appoint repre- 
sentatives, and so create a government ; the government thus 
created, creates rights ; and then, having created rights, it 
confers them on the separate members of the sovereign peo- 
ple by which it was itself created. Here is a marvellous 
piece of political legerdemain ! Mr. Matthew Arnold, con- 
tending, in the article above quoted, that " property is the 
creation of law," tells us to beware of the "metaphysical 

* Bentham's Works (Bowring's edition), vol. i. p. 301. 
t W. H. Prescott, Conquest of Peru, bk. i. ch. i. 

X J. Harris, Highlands of Ethiopia, ii. 94. 

* R. F. Burton, Mission to Oelele, King ofDahomt, i. p. 226. 
| Bentham's Works, vol. ix. p. 97. 

THE GEEAT POLITICAL SUPEKSTITION. 187 

phantom of property in itself." Surely, among metaphysical 
phantoms the most shadowy is this which supposes a thing 
to be obtained by creating an agent, which creates the thing, 
and then confers the thing on its own creator ! 

From whatever point of view we consider it, Bentham's 
proposition proves to be unthinkable. Government, he says, 
fulfils its office " by creating rights." Two meanings may be 
given to the word " creating." It may be supposed to mean 
the production of something out of nothing ; or it may be 
supposed to mean the giving form and structure to some- 
thing which already exists. There are many who think that 
the production of something out of nothing cannot be con- 
ceived as effected even by omnipotence ; and probably none 
will assert that the production of something out of nothing 
is within the competence of a human government. The alter- 
native conception is that a human government creates only 
in the sense that it shapes something pre-existing. In that 
case, the question arises — " What is the something pre-exist- 
ing which it shapes ? " Clearly the word " creating " begs 
the whole question — passes off an illusion on the unwary 
reader. Bentham was a stickler for definiteness of expres- 
sion, and in his Book of Fallacies has a chapter on " Impos- 
tor-terms." It is curious that he should have furnished so 
striking an illustration of the perverted belief which an im- 
postor-term may generate. 

But now let us overlook these various impossibilities of 
thought, and seek the most defensible interpretation of Ben- 
tham's view. 

It may be said that the totality of all powers and rights, 
originally exists as an undivided whole in the sovereign peo- 
ple ; and that this undivided whole is given in trust (as Aus- 
tin would say) to a ruling power, appointed by the sovereign 
people, for the purpose of distribution. If, as we have seen, 
the proposition that rights are created is simply a figure of 
speech ; then the only intelligible construction of Bentham's 
view is that a multitude of individuals, who severally wish to 

188 

THE MAN VEESUS THE STATE. 

satisfy their desires, and have, as an aggregate, possession of 
all the sources of satisfaction, as well as power over all indi- 
vidual actions, appoint a government, which declares the 
ways in which, and the conditions under which, individual 
actions may be carried on and the satisfactions obtained. 
Let us observe the implications. Each man exists in two 
capacities. In his private capacity he is subject to the gov- 
ernment. In his public capacity he is one of the sovereign 
people who appoint the government. That is to say, in his 
private capacity he is one of those to whom rights are given ; 
and in his public capacity he is one of those who, through 
the government they appoint, give the rights. Turn this 
abstract statement into a concrete statement, and see what it 
means. Let the community consist of a million men, who, 
by the hypothesis, are not only joint possessors of the in- 
habited region, but joint possessors of all liberties of action 
and appropriation : the only right recognized being that of 
the aggregate to everything. What follows ? Each person, 
while not owning any product of his own labour, has, as a 
unit in the sovereign body, a millionth part of the ownership 
of the products of all others' labour. This is an unavoidable 
implication. As the government, in Bentham's view, is but 
an agent ; the rights it confers are rights given to it in trust 
by the sovereign people. If so, such rights must be possessed 
en bloc by the sovereign people before the government, in 
fulfilment of its trust, confers them on individuals; and, if 
so, each individual has a millionth portion of these rights in 
his public capacity, while he has no rights in his private 
capacity. These he gets only when all the rest of the million 
join to endow him with them ; while he joins to endow with 
them every other member of the million ! 

Thus, in whatever way we interpret it, Bentham's propo- 
sition leaves us in a plexus of absurdities. 

Even though ignoring the opposite opinion of German 
and French writers on jurisprudence, and even without an 

THE GEEAT POLITICAL SUPEESTITION. 189 

analysis which proves their own opinion to be untenable, 
Bentham's disciples might have been lead to treat less cava- 
lierly the doctrine of natural rights. For sundry groups of 
social phenomena unite to prove that this doctrine is well 
warranted, and the doctrine they set against it unwarranted. 

Tribes all over the world show us that before definite 
government arises, conduct is regulated by customs. The 
Bechuanas are controlled by " long-acknowledged customs." * 
Among the Koranna Hottentots, who only " tolerate their 
chiefs rather than obey them," f " when ancient usages are 
not in the way, every man seems to act as is right in his own 
eyes." % The Araucanians are guided by " nothing more 
than primordial usuages or tacit conventions." # Among the 
Kirghizes the judgments of the elders are based on " univers- 
ally-recognized customs." | Similarly of the Dyaks, Rajah 
Brooke says that " custom seems simply to have become the 
law ; and breaking custom leads to a fine." A So sacred are 
immemorial customs with the primitive man, that he never 
dreams of questioning their authority ; and when govern- 
ment arises, its power is limited by them. In Madagascar 
the king's word suffices only " where there is no law, custom, 
or precedent." Q Raffles tells us that in Java " the customs 
of the country " % restrain the will of the ruler. In Su- 
matra, too, the people do not allow their chiefs to "alter 
their ancient usages." % Nay, occasionally, as in Ashantee, 

* W. J. Burchell, Travels into the Interior of Southern Africa, toL i. 
p. 544 

f Arbousset and Daumas, Voyage of Exploration, p. 27. 
X G. Thompson, Travels and Adventures in Southern Africa, vol. ii. 
p. 30. 

* G. A. Thompson, Alcedo's Geographical and Historical Dictionary 
)f America, vol. i. p. 405. 

|| Alex. Miehie, Siberian Overland Route, p. 248. 
A C. Brooke, Ten Years in Sarawak, vol. i. p. 129. 

0 W. Ellis, History of Madagascar, vol. L p. 377. 

1 Sir T. S. Raffles, History of Java, i. 274. 
$ W. Marsden, History of Sumatra, p. 217. 

190 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

" the attempt to change some customs " has caused a king's 
dethronement. * Now, among the customs which we thus 
find to be pre-governmental, and which subordinate govern- 
mental power when it is established, are those which recog- 
nize certain individual rights — rights to act in certain ways 
and possess certain things. Even where the recognition of 
of property is least developed, there is proprietorship of 
weapons, tools, and personal ornaments ; and, generally, the 
recognition goes far beyond this. Among 6uch North- 
American Indians as the Snakes, who are without Govern- 
ment, there is private ownership of horses. By the Chippe- 
wayans, " who have no regular government," game taken in 
private traps "is considered as private property."! Kin- 
dred facts concerning huts, utensils, and other personal be- 
longings, might be brought in evidence from accounts of the 
Ahts, the Comanches, the Esquimaux, and the Brazilian 
Indians. Among various uncivilized peoples, custom has 
established the claim to the crop grown on a cleared plot of 
ground, though not to the ground itself ; and the Todas, 
who are wholly without political organization, make a like 
distinction between ownership of cattle and of land. Kolff's 
statement respecting " the peaceful Araf uras " well sums up 
the evidence. They " recognize the right of property in the 
fullest sense of the word, without their being any [other] 
authority among them than the decisions of their elders, 
according to the customs of their forefathers." % But even 
without seeking proofs among the uncivilized, sufficient 
proofs are furnished by early stages of the civilized. Ben- 
tham and his followers seem to have forgotten that our own 
common law is mainly an embodiment of " the customs of 
the realm." It did but give definite shape to that which it 
found existing. Thus, the fact and the fiction are exactly 

* J. Beecham, Ashantee and the Gold Coast, p. 90. 
t H. R. Schoolcraft, Expedition to the Sources of the Mississippi River, 
T. 177. 

% G. W. Earl's Kolff's Voyage of the Dourga, p. 161. 

THE GEEAT POLITICAL SUPEKSTITION. 191 

opposite to what they allege. The fact is that property was 
well recognized before law existed ; the fiction is that " prop- 
erty is the creation of law." These writers and statesmen 
who with so much scorn undertake to instruct the ignorant 
herd, themselves stand in need of instruction. 

Considerations of another class might alone have led them 
to pause. "Were it true, as alleged by Bentham, that Govern- 
ment fulfils its office " by creating rights which it confers on 
individuals ; " then, the implication would be, that there should 
be nothing approaching to uniformity in the rights conferred 
by different governments. In the absence of a determining 
cause over-ruling their decisions, the probabilities would be 
many to one against considerable correspondence among their 
decisions. But there is very great correspondence. Look 
where we may, we find that governments interdict the same 
kinds of aggressions ; and, by implication, recognize the same 
kinds of claims. They habitually forbid homicide, theft, 
adultery : thus asserting that citizens may not be trespassed 
against in certain ways. And as society advances, minor in- 
dividual claims are protected by giving remedies for breach 
of contract, libel, false witness, &c. In a word, comparisons 
show that though codes of law differ in their details as they 
become elaborated, they agree in their fundamentals. What 
does this prove? It cannot be by chance that they thus 
agree. They agree because the alleged creating of rights was 
nothing else than giving formal sanction and better definition 
to those assertions of claims and recognitions of claims which 
naturally originate from the individual desires of men who 
have to live in presence of one another. 

Comparative Sociology discloses another group of facts 
having the same implication. Along with social progress it 
becomes in an increasing degree the business of the State, 
not only to give formal sanction to men's rights, but also to 
defend them against aggressors. Before permanent govern' 
ment exists, and in many cases after it is considerably de- 
veloped, the rights of each individual are asserted and main- 

192 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

tained by himself, or by bis family. Alike among savage 
tribes at present, among civilized peoples in the past, and 
even now in unsettled parts of Europe, the punishment for 
murder is a matter of private concern ; " the sacred duty of 
blood revenge " devolves on some one of a cluster of rela- 
tives. Similarly, compensations for aggressions on property 
and for injuries of other kinds, are in early states of society 
independently 60ught by each man or family. But as social 
organization advances, the central ruling power undertakes 
more and more to secure to individuals their personal safety, 
the safety of their possessions, and, to some extent, the en- 
forcement of their claims established by contract. Originally 
concerned almost exclusive with defence of the society as 
a whole against other societies, or with conducting its attacks 
on other societies, Government has come more and more to 
discharge the function of defending individuals against one 
another. It needs but to recall the days when men habitu- 
ally carried weapons, or to bear in mind the greater safety to 
person and property achieved by improved police-administra- 
tion during our own time, or to note the facilities now given 
for recovering small debts, to see that the insuring to each 
individual the unhindered pursuit of the objects of life, 
within limits set by others' like pursuits, is increasingly 
recognized as a duty of the State. In other words, along 
with social progress, there goes not only a fuller recognition 
of these which we call natural rights, but also a better 
enforcement of them by Government : Government becomes 
more and more the servant to these essential pre-requisites 
for individual welfare. 

An allied and still more significant change has accom- 
panied this. In early stages, at the same time that the State 
failed to protect the individual against aggression, it was 
itself an aggressor in multitudinous ways. Those ancient 
societies which advanced far enough to leave records, having 
all been conquering societies, show us everywhere the traits 
of the militant regime. As, for the effectual organization of 

THE GEEAT POLITICAL SUPERSTITION. 193 

fighting bodies, the soldiers, absolutely obedient, must act 
independently only when commanded to do it ; so, for the 
effectual organization of fighting societies, citizens must have 
their individualities subordinated. Private claims are over- 
ridden by public claims ; and the subject loses much of his 
freedom of action. One result is that the system of regi- 
mentation, pervading the society as well as the army, causes 
detailed regulation of conduct. The dictates of the ruler, 
sanctified by ascription of them to his divine ancestor, are 
unrestrained by any conception of individual liberty ; and 
they specify men's actions to an unlimited extent — down to 
kinds of food eaten, modes of preparing them, shaping of 
beards, fringing of dresses, sowing of grain, &c. This omni- 
present control, which the ancient Eastern nations in general 
exhibited, was exhibited also in large measure by the Greeks ; 
and was carried to its greatest pitch in the most militant 
city, Sparta. Similarly during mediaeval days throughout 
Europe, characterized by chronic warfare with its appropri- 
ate political forms and ideas, there were scarcely any bounds 
to Governmental interference ; agriculture, manufactures, 
trades, were regulated in detail ; religious beliefs and observ- 
ances were imposed ; and rulers said by whom alone furs 
might be worn, silver used, books issued, pigeons kept, &c, 
&c. But along with increase of industrial activities, and 
implied substitution of the regime of contract for the regime 
of status, and growth of associated sentiments, there went 
(until the recent reaction accompanying reversion to mili- 
tant activity) a decrease of meddling with people's doings. 
Legislation gradually ceased to regulate the cropping of 
fields, or dictate the ratio of cattle to acreage, or specify 
modes of manufacture and materials to be used, or fix wages 
and prices, or interfere with dresses and games (except 
where there was gambling), or put bounties and penalties on 
imports or exports, or prescribe men's beliefs, religious or 
political, or prevent them from combining as they pleased, 
or travelling where they liked. That is to say, throughout a 

194 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

large range of conduct, the right of the citizen to uncon- 
trolled action has been made good against the pretensions of 
the State to control him. While the ruling agency has in- 
creasingly helped him to exclude intruders from that private 
sphere in which he pursues the objects of life, it has itself 
retreated from that sphere ; or, in other words — decreased 
its intrusions. 

Not even yet have we noted all the classes of facts which 
tell the same story. It is told afresh in the improvements 
and reforms of law itself ; as well as in the admissions and 
assertions of those who have effected them. " So early as 
the fifteenth century," says Professor Pollock, " we find a 
common-law judge declaring that, as in a case unprovided 
for by known rules the civilians and canonists devise a new 
rule according to ' the law of nature which is the ground of 
all laws,' the Courts of Westminster can and will do the 
like." * Again, our system of Equity, introduced and de- 
veloped as it was to make up for the shortcomings of 
Common-law, or rectify its inequities, proceeded throughout 
on a recognition of men's claims considered as existing apart 
from legal warrant. And the changes of law now from time 
to time made after resistance, are similarly made in pursu- 
ance of current ideas concerning the requirements of jus- 
tice ; ideas which, instead of being derived from the law, are 
opposed to the law. For example, that recent Act which 
gives to a married woman a right of property in her own 
earnings, evidently originated in the consciousness that the 
natural connexion between labour expended and benefit en- 
joyed, is one which should be maintained in all cases. The 
reformed law did not create the right, but recognition of the 
right created the reformed law. 

Thus, historical evidences of five different kinds unite in 
teaching that, confused as are the popular notions concerning 

* " The Methods of Jurisprudence : an Introductory Lecture at Uni- 
versity College, London," October 31, 1882. 

THE GEEAT POLITICAL SUPERSTITION. 195 

rights, and including, as they do, a great deal which should 
be excluded, yet they shadow forth a truth. 

It remains now to consider the original source of this 
truth. In a previous paper I have spoken of the open secret, 
that there can be no social phenomena but what, if we analyze 
them to the bottom, bring us down to the laws of life ; and 
that there can be no true understanding of them without re- 
ference to the laws of life. Let us, then, transfer this ques- 
tion of natural rights from the court of politics to the court 
of science — the science of life. The reader need feel no alarm : 
the simplest and most obvious facts will suffice. We will con- 
template first the general conditions to individual life ; and 
then the general conditions to social life. "We shall find that 
both yield the same verdict. 

Animal lif e involves waste ; waste must be met by repair ; 
repair implies nutrition. Again, nutrition presupposes ob- 
tainment of food ; food cannot be got without powers of pre- 
hension, and, usually, of locomotion ; and that these powers 
may achieve their ends, there must be freedom to move 
about. If you shut up a mammal in a small space, or tie its 
limbs together, or take from it the food it has procured, you 
eventually, by persistence in one or other of these courses, 
cause its death. Passing a certain point, hindrance to the 
fulfilment of these requirements is fatal. And all this, which 
holds of the higher animals at large, of course holds of man. 

If we adopt pessimism as a creed, and with it accept the 
implication that life in general being an evil should be put 
an end to, then there is no ethical warrant for these actions 
by which life is maintained : the whole question drops. But 
if we adopt either the optimist view or the meliorist view — if 
we say that lif e on the whole yields more pleasure than pain ; 
or that it is on the way to become such that it will yield more 
pleasure than pain ; then these actions by which life is main- 
tained are justified, and there results a warrant for the free- 
dom to perform them. Those who hold that lif e is valuable, 

196 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

hold, by implication, that men ought not to be prevented from 
carrying on life-sustaining activities. In other words, if it is 
6aid to be " right " that they should carry them on, then, by 
permutation, we get the assertion that they " have a right " 
to carry them on. Clearly the conception of " natural rights" 
originates in recognition of the truth that if life is justifiable, 
there must be a justification for the performance of acts es- 
sential to its preservation ; and, therefore, a justification for 
those liberties and claims which make such acts possible. 

But being true of other creatures as of man, this is a 
proposition lacking ethical character. Ethical character arises 
only with the distinction between what the individual inay do 
in carrying on his life-sustaining activities, and what he way 
not do. This distinction obviously results from the presence 
of his fellows. Among those who are in close proximity, or 
even some distance apart, the doings of each are apt to inter- 
fere with the doings of others ; and in the absence of proof 
that some may do what they will without limit, while others 
may not, mutual limitation is necessitated. The non-ethical 
form of the right to pursue end8, passes into the ethical form, 
when there is recognized the difference between acts which 
can be performed without transgressing the limits, and others 
which cannot be so performed. 

This, which is the a priori conclusion, is the conclusion 
yielded a posteriori, when we study the doings of the un- 
civilized. In its vaguest form, mutual limitation of spheres 
of action, and the ideas and the sentiments associated with it, 
are seen in the relations of groups to one another. Habitually 
there come to be established, certain bounds to the territories 
within which each tribe obtains its livelihood ; and these 
bounds, when not respected, are defended. Among the 
"Wood-Veddahs, who have no political organization, the small 
clans have their respective portions of forest; and "these 
conventional allotments are always honourably recognized." * 

• Sir J. E. Tcnnant, Ceylon : an Account of the Island, &c, ii. 440. 

THE GEEAT POLITICAL SUPEESTITION. 197 

Of the ungoverned tribes of Tasmania, we are told that 
" their hunting grounds were all determined, and trespassers 
were liable to attack." * And, manifestly, the quarrels caused 
among tribes by intrusions on one another's territories, tend, 
in the long run, to fix bounds and to give a certain sanction 
to them. As with each inhabited area, so with each inhabit- 
ing group. A death in one, rightly or wrongly ascribed to 
somebody in another, prompts "the sacred duty of blood- 
revenge ; " and though retaliations are thus made chronic, 
some restraint is put on new aggressions. Like causes worked 
like effects in those early stages of civilized societies, during 
which families or clans, rather than individuals, were the po- 
litical units ; and during which each family or clan had to 
maintain itself and its possessions against others such. These 
mutual restraints, which in the nature of things arise between 
small communities, similarly arise between individuals in each 
community ; and the ideas and usages appropriate to the one 
are more or less appropriate to the other. Though within 
each group there is ever a tendency for the stronger to aggress 
on the weaker ; yet, in most cases, consciousness of the evils 
resulting from aggressive conduct serves to restrain. Every- 
where among primitive peoples, trespasses are followed by 
counter-trespasses. Says Turner of the Tannese, " adultery 
and some other crimes are kept in check by the fear of club- 
law." f Fitzroy tells us that the Patagonian, " if he does not 
injure or offend hi6 neighbour, is not interfered with by 
others : " \ personal vengeance being the penalty for injury. 
We read of the Uapes that " they have very little law of any 
kind ; but what they have is of strict retaliation — an eye for 
an eye and a tooth for a tooth." # And that the lex talionis 
tends to establish a distinction between what each member of 

* J. Bonwick, Daily Life and Origin of the Tasmanians, p. 83. 
f Nineteen Years in Polynesia, p. 86. 

% Voyages of the Adventure and Beagle, ii. 167. 

• A. R. Wallace, Travels on Amazon and Rio Negro, p. 499. 

198 

THE MAN VEBSVS THE STATE. 

the community may safely do and what he may not safely do, 
and consequently to give sanctions to actions within a certain 
range but not beyond that range, is obvious. Though, says 
Schoolcraft of the Chippewayans, they " have no regular 
government, as every man is lord in his own family, they are 
influenced more or less by certain principles, which conduce 
to their general benefit : " * one of the principles named being 
recognition of private property. 

How mutual limitation of activities originates the ideas 
and sentiments implied by the phrase " natural rights," we 
are shown most distinctly by the few peaceful tribes which 
have either nominal governments or none at all. Beyond 
those facts which exemplify scrupulous regard for one an- 
other's claims among the Todas, Santals, Lepchas, Bodo, 
Chakmas, Jakuns, Arafuras, &c, we have the fact that the 
utterly uncivilized "Wood-Veddahs, without any social organ- 
ization at all, " think it perfectly inconceivable that any per- 
son should ever take that which does not belong to him, or 
strike his fellow, or say anything that is untrue." f Thus it be- 
comes clear, alike from analysis of causes and observation of 
facts, that while the positive element in the right to carry on 
life-sustaining activities, originates from the laws of life, 
that negative element which gives ethical character to it, 
originates from the conditions produced by social aggre- 
gation. 

So alien to the truth, indeed, is the alleged creation of 
rights by government, that, contrariwise, rights having been 
established more or less clearly before government arises, 
become obscured as government develops along with that 
militant activity which, both by the taking of slaves and the 
establishment of ranks, produces status; and the recognition 
of rights begins again to get definiteness only as fast as 

* H. R. Schoolcraft, Expedition to the Sources of the Mississippi, v. 177. 
t B. F. Hartshorne in Fortnightly Review, March, 1876. See also H. C. 
Sirr, Ceylon and Ceylonese, ii. 219. 

THE GEEAT POLITICAL SUPERSTITION. 199 

militancy ceases to be chronic and governmental power 
declines. 

When we turn from the life of the individual to the life 
df the society, the same lesson is taught us. 

Though mere love of companionship prompts primitive 
men to live in groups, yet the chief prompter is experience 
of the advantages to be derived from co-operation. On what 
condition only can co-operation arise? Evidently on con- 
dition that those who join their efforts severally gain by 
doing so. If, as in the simplest cases, they unite to achieve 
something which each by himself cannot achieve, or can 
achieve less readily, it must be on the tacit understanding, 
either that they shall share the benefit (as when game is 
caught by a party of them), or that if one reaps all the bene- 
fit now (as in building a hut or clearing a plot), the others 
shall severally reap equivalent benefits in their turns. When, 
instead of efforts joined in doing the same thing, different 
things are effected by them — when division of labour arises, 
with accompanying barter of products, the arrangement 
implies that each, in return for something which he has in 
superfluous quantity, gets an approximate equivalent of 
something which he wants. If he hands over the one and 
does not get the other, future proposals to exchange will 
meet with no response. There will be a reversion to that 
rudest condition in which each makes everything for himself. 
Hence the possibility of co-operation depends on fulfilment 
of contract, tacit or overt. 

Now this which we see must hold of the very first step 
towards that industrial organization by which the fife of a 
society is maintained, must hold more or less fully through- 
out its development. Though the militant type of organiza- 
tion, with its system of status produced by chronic war, 
greatly obscures these relations of contracts, yet they remain 
partially in force. They still hold between freemen, and 
between the heads of those small groups which form the 

200 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

units of early societies; and, in a measure, they still hold 
within these small groups themselves ; since survival of 
them as groups, implies such recognition of the claims of 
their members, even when slaves, that in return for their 
labours they get sufficiencies of food, clothing, and protection. 
And when, with diminution of warfare and growth of trade, 
voluntary co-operation more and more replaces compulsory 
co-operation, and the carrying on of social life by exchange 
under agreement, partially suspended for a time, gradually 
re-establishes itself ; its re-establishment makes possible that 
vast elaborate industrial organization by which a great nation 
is sustained. 

For in proportion as contracts are unhindered and the per- 
formance of them certain, the growth is great and the social 
lif e active. It is not now by one or other of two individuals 
who contract, that the evil effects of breach of contract are 
experienced. In an advanced society, they are experienced 
by entire classes of producers and distributors, which have 
arisen through division of labor ; and, eventually, they are 
experienced by everybody. Ask on what condition it is that 
Birmingham devotes itself to manufacturing hardware, or 
part of Staffordshire to making pottery, or Lancashire to 
weaving cotton. Ask how the rural people who here grow 
wheat and there pasture cattle, find it possible to occupy 
themselves in their special businesses. These groups can 
severally thus act only if each gets from the others in 
exchange for its own surplus product, due shares of their 
surplus products. No longer directly effected by barter, this 
obtainment of their respective shares of one another's prod- 
ucts is indirectly effected by money ; and if we ask how 
each division of producers gets its due amount of the required 
money, the answer is — by fulfilment of contract. If Leeds 
makes woollens and does not, by fulfilment of contract, 
receive the means of obtaining from agricultural districts the 
needful quantity of food, it must starve, and stop producing 
woollens. If South Wales smelts iron and there comes no 

THE GKEAT POLITICAL SUPERSTITION. 201 

equivalent agreed upon, enabling it to get fabrics for clothing, 
its industry must cease. And so throughout, in general and 
in detail. That mutual dependence of parts which we see in 
social organization, as in individual organization, is possible 
only on condition that while each other part does the particu- 
lar kind of work it has become adjusted to, it receives its 
proportion of those materials required for repair and growth, 
which all the other parts have joined to produce : such pro- 
portion being settled by bargaining. Moreover, it is by ful- 
filment of contract that there is effected a balancing of all 
the various products to the various needs — the large manu- 
facture of knives and the small manufacture of lancets ; the 
great growth of wheat and the little growth of mustard -seed. 
The check on undue production of each commodity, results 
from finding that, after a certain quantity, no one will agree 
to take any further quantity on terms that yield an adequate 
money equivalent. And so there is prevented a useless 
expenditure of labour in producing that which society does 
not want. 

Lastly, we have to note the still more significant fact that 
the condition under which only, any specialized group of 
workers can grow when the community needs more of its 
particular kind of work, is that contracts shall be free and 
fulfilment of them enforced. If when, from lack of mate- 
rial, Lancashire failed to supply the usual quantity of cotton- 
goods, there had been such interference with the contracts as 
prevented Yorkshire from asking a greater price for its 
woollens, which it was enabled to do by the greater demand 
for them, there would have been no temptation to put more 
capital into the woollen manufacture, no increase in the 
amount of machinery and number of artisans employed, and 
no increase of woollens : the consequence being that the 
whole community would have suffered from not having 
deficient cottons replaced by extra woollens. What serious 
injury may result to a nation if its members are hindered 
from contracting with one another, was well shown in the 

202 

THE MAN VEBSUS THE STATE. 

contrast between England and France in respect of railways. 
Here, though obstacles were at first raised by classes pre- 
dominant in the legislature, the obstacles were not such as 
prevented capitalists from investing, engineers from furnish- 
ing directive skill, or contractors from undertaking works ; 
and the high interest originally obtained on investments, the 
great profits made by contractors, and the large payments 
received by engineers, led to that drafting of money, energy, 
and ability, into railway-making, which rapidly developed 
our railway-system, to the enormous increase of our national 
prosperity. But when M. Thiers, then Minister of Public 
"Works, came over to inspect, and having been taken about 
by Mr. Vignoles, said to him when leaving : — " I do not think 
railways are suited to France," * there resulted, from the 
consequent policy of hindering free contract, a delay of 
" eight or ten years " in that material progress which France 
experienced when railways were made. 

What do these facts mean? They mean that for the 
healthful activity and due proportioning of those industries, 
occupations and professions, which maintain and aid the life 
of a society, there must, in the first place, be few restrictions 
on men's liberties to make agreements with one another, and 
there must, in the second place, be an enforcement of the 
agreements which they do make. As we have seen, the 
checks naturally arising to each man's actions when men 
become associated, are those only which result from mutual 
limitation ; and there consequently can be no resulting check 
to the contracts they voluntarily make : interference with 
these is interference with those rights to free action which 
remain to each when the rights of others are fully recognized. 
And then, as we have seen, enforcement of their rights 
implies enforcement of contracts made ; since breach of con- 
tract is indirect aggression. If, when a customer on one side 

* Address of C. B. Vignoles, Esq., F.R.S., on his election as President 
of the Institution of Civil Engineers, Session 1869-70, p. 53. 

THE GEEAT POLITICAL SUPERSTITION. 203 

of the counter asks a shopkeeper on the other for a shilling's 
worth of his goods, and, while the shopkeeper's back is 
turned, walks off with the goods without leaving the shilling 
he tacitly contracted to give, his act differs in no essential 
way from robbery. In each such case the individual injured 
is deprived of something he possessed, without receiving the 
equivalent something bargained for ; and is in the state of 
having expended his labour without getting benefit — has 
had an essential condition to the maintenance of life in- 
fringed. 

Thus, then, it results that to recognize and enforce the 
rights of individuals, is at the same time to recognize and 
enforce the conditions to a normal social life. There is one 
vital requirement for both. 

Before turning to those corollaries which have practical 
applications, let us observe how the special conclusions 
drawn converge to the one general conclusion originally 
foreshadowed — glancing at them in reversed order. 

"We have just found that the pre-requisite to individual 
life is in a double sense the pre-requisite to social life. The 
life of a society, in whichever of two senses conceived, 
depends on maintenance of individual rights. If it is 
nothing more than the sum of the lives of citizens, this 
implication is obvious. If it consists of those many unlike 
activities which citizens carry on in mutual dependence, still 
this aggregate impersonal life rises or falls according as the 
rights of individuals are enforced or denied. 

Study of men's politico-ethical ideas and sentiments, leads 
to allied conclusions. Primitive peoples of various types 
show us that before governments exist, immemorial customs 
recognize private claims and justify maintenance of them. 
Codes of law independently evolved by different nations, 
agree in forbidding certain trespasses on the persons, prop- 
erties, and liberties of citizens ; and their correspondences 
imply, not an artificial source for individual rights, but a 

204 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

natural source. Along with social development, the formu- 
lating in law of the rights pre-established by custom, becomes 
more definite and elaborate. At the same time, Government 
undertakes to an increasing extent the business of enforcing 
them. While it has been becoming a better protector, 
Gevernment has been becoming less aggressive — has more 
and more diminished its intrusions on men's spheres of 
private action. And, lastly, as in past times laws were 
avowedly modified to fit better with current ideas of equity ; 
so now, law-reformers are guided by ideas of equity which 
are not derived from law but to which law has to conform. 

Here, then, we have a politico-ethical theory justified alike 
by analysis and by history. What have we against it ? A 
fashionable counter-theory, purely dogmatic, which proves to 
be unjustifiable. On the one hand, while we find that indi- 
vidual life and social life both imply maintenance of the 
natural relation between efforts and benefits ; we also find 
that this natural relation, recognized before Government 
existed, has been all along asserting and re-asserting itself, 
and obtaining better recognition in codes of law and systems 
of ethics. On the other hand, those who, denying natural 
rights, commit themselves to the assertion that rights are arti- 
ficially created by law, are not only flatly contradicted by 
facts, but their assertion is self -destructive : the endeavour 
to substantiate it, when challenged, involves them in manifold 
absurdities. 

Nor is this all. The re-institution of a vague popular con- 
ception in a definite form on a scientific basis, leads us to a 
rational view of the relation between the wills of majorities 
and minorities. It turns out that those co-operations in 
which all can voluntarily unite, and in the carrying on of 
which the will of the majority is rightly supreme, are co- 
operations for maintaining the conditions requisite to indi- 
vidual and social life. Defence of the society as a whole 
against external invaders, has for its remote end to preserve 
each citizen in possession of such means as he has for satisfy- 

THE GEEAT POLITICAL SUPEESTITION. 

205 

ing his desires, and in possession of such liberty as he has for 
getting further means. And defence of each citizen against 
internal invaders, from murderers down to those who inflict 
nuisances on their neighbours, has obviously the like end — 
an end desired by every one save the criminal and disorderly. 
Hence it follows that for maintenance of this vital principle, 
alike of individual life and social life, subordination of 
minority to majority is legitimate ; as implying only such a 
trenching on the freedom and property of each, as is requisite 
for the better protecting of his freedom and property. At 
the same time it follows that such subordination is not legiti- 
mate beyond this ; since, implying as it does a greater aggres- 
sion upon the individual than is requisite for protecting him, 
it involves a breach of the vital principle which is to be 
maintained. 

Thus we come round again to the proposition that the 
assumed divine right of parliaments, and the implied divine 
right of majorities, are superstitions. "While men have 
abandoned the old theory respecting the source of State- 
authority, they have retained a belief in that unlimited ex- 
tent of State-authority which rightly accompanied the old 
theory, but does not rightly accompany the new one. Unre- 
stricted power over subjects, rationally ascribed to the ruling 
man when he was held to be a deputy-god, is now ascribed 
to the ruling body, the deputy-godhood of which nobody 
asserts. 

Opponents will, possibly, contend that discussions about 
the origin and limits of governmental authority are mere 
pedantries. " Government," they may perhaps say, " is 
bound to use all the means it has, or can get, for furthering 
the general happiness. Its aim must be utility ; and it is 
warranted in employing whatever measures are needful for 
achieving useful ends. The welfare of the people is the 
supreme law ; and legislators are not to be deterred from 
obeying that law by questions concerning the source and 

206 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

range of their power." Is there really an escape here ? or 
may this opening be effectually closed ? 

The essential question raised is the truth of the utilitarian 
theory as commonly held ; and the answer here to be given 
is that, as commonly held, it is not true. Alike by the state- 
ments of utilitarian moralists, and by the acts of politicians 
knowingly or unknowingly following their lead, it is implied 
that utility is to be directly determined by simple inspection 
of the immediate facts and estimation of probable results. 
Whereas, utilitarianism as rightly understood, implies guid- 
ance by the general conclusions which analysis of experience 
yields. " Good and bad results cannot be accidental, but 
must be necessary consequences of the constitution of things ; " 
and it is " the business of Moral Science to deduce, from the 
laws of life and the conditions of existence, what kinds of 
action necessarily tend to produce happiness, and what kinds 
to produce unhappiness." * Current utilitarian speculation, 
like current practical politics, shows inadequate conscious- 
ness of natural causation. The habitual thought is that, in 
the absence of some obvious impediment, things can be done 
this way or that way ; and no question is put whether there 
is either agreement or conflict with the normal working of 
things. 

The foregoing discussions have, I think, shown that the 
dictates of utility, and, consequently, the proper actions of 
governments, are not to be settled by inspection of facts on 
the surface, and acceptance of their prima facie meanings ; 
but are to be settled by reference to, and deductions from, 
fundamental facts. The fundamental facts to which all 
rational judgments of utility must go back, are the facts that 
life consists in, and is maintained by, certain activities ; and 
that among men in a society, these activities, necessarily 
becoming mutually limited, are to be carried on by each 
within the limits thence arising, and not carried on beyond 

* Data of Ethics, § 21. See also §§ 56-62. 

THE GEEAT POLITICAL SUPERSTITION. 207 

those limits : the maintenance of the limits becoming, by 
consequence, the function of the agency which regulates so- 
ciety. If each, having freedom to use his powers up to the 
bounds fixed by the like freedom of others, obtains from his 
fellow-men as much for his services as they find them worth 
in comparison with the services of others — if contracts uni- 
formly fulfilled bring to each the share thus determined, and 
he is left secure in person and possessions to satisfy his 
wants with the proceeds ; then there is maintained the vital 
principle alike of individual life and of social life. Further, 
there is maintained the vital principle of social progress ; in- 
asmuch as, under such conditions, the individuals of most 
worth will prosper and multiply more than those of less 
worth. So that utility, not as empirically estimated but as 
rationally determined, enjoins this maintenance of individual 
rights ; and, by implication, negatives any course which 
traverses them. 

Here, then, we reach the ultimate interdict against med- 
dling legislation. Reduced to its lowest terms, every pro- 
posal to interfere with citizens' activities further than by en- 
forcing their mutual limitations, is a proposal to improve life 
by breaking through the fundamental conditions to life. 
When some are prevented from buying beer that others may 
be prevented from getting drunk, those who make the law 
assume that more good than evil will result from interference 
with the normal relation between conduct and consequences, 
alike in the few ill-regulated and the many well-regulated. 
A government which takes fractions of the incomes of mul- 
titudinous people, for the purpose of sending to the colonies 
some who have not prospered here, or for building better in- 
dustrial dwellings, or for making public libraries and public 
museums, &c, takes for granted that, not only proximately 
but ultimately, increased general happiness will result from 
transgressing the essential requirement to general happiness 
— the requirement that each shall enjoy all those means to 
happiness which his actions, carried on without aggression, 

208 

THE MAN VERSUS THE STATE. 

have brought him. In other cases we do not thus let the 
immediate blind us to the remote. When asserting the sa- 
credness of property against private transgressors, we do not 
ask whether the benefit to a hungry man who takes bread 
from a baker's shop, is or is not greater than the injury in- 
flicted on the baker : we consider, not the special effects, but 
the general effects which arise if property is insecure. But 
when the State exacts further amounts from citizens, or fur- 
ther restrains their liberties, we consider only the direct and 
proximate effects, and ignore the direct and distant effects. 
"We do not see that by accumulated small infractions of 
them, the vital conditions to life, individual and social, come 
to be so imperfectly fulfilled that the life decays. 

Yet the decay thus caused becomes manifest where the 
policy is pushed to an extreme. Any one who studies, in the 
writings of MM. Taine and de Tocqueville, the 6tate of 
things which preceded the French Revolution, will see that 
that tremendous catastrophe came about from so excessive a 
regulation of men's actions in all their details, and such an 
enormous drafting away of the products of their actions to 
maintain the regulating organization, that life was fast be- 
coming impracticable. The empirical utilitarianism of that 
day, like the empirical utiliarianism of our day, differed 
from rational utilitarianism in this, that in each successive 
case it contemplated only the effects of particular interfer- 
ences on the actions of particular classes of men, and 
ignored the effects produced by a multiplicity of such inter- 
ferences on the lives of men at large. And if we ask what 
then made, and what now makes, this error possible, we find 
it to be the political superstition that governmental power is 
subject to no restraints. 

When that "divinity" which " doth hedge a king," and 
which has left a glamour around the body inheriting his 
power, has quite died away — when it begins to be seen 
clearly that, in a popularly governed nation, the government 
is simply a committee of management ; it will also be seen 

THE GEEAT POLITICAL SUPERSTITION. 209 

that this committee of management has no intrinsic authori- 
ty. The inevitable conclusion will be that its authority is 
given by those appointing it ; and has just such bounds as 
they choose to impose. Along with this will go the further 
conclusion that the laws it passes are not in themselves sa- 
cred ; but that whatever sacredness they have, it is entirely 
due to the ethical sanction — an ethical sanction which, as we 
find, is derivable from the laws of human life as carried on 
under social conditions. And there will come the corollary 
that when they have not this ethical sanction they have no 
sacredness, and may rightly be challenged. 

The function of Liberalism in the past was that of putting 
a limit to the powers of kings. The function of true Liber- 
alism in the future will be that of putting a limit to the pow- 
ers of Parliaments. 

INDEX 

Agricultural Children's Act, 13 
Anne, 3 
Arch, 45 

Army, 94, 124, 125 
Arnold, Matthew, 185, 186 
Artisans' Dwellings Acts, 91 
Austin, 178, 181 

Bakehouses Regulation Act, 11 

Barlow, Prof., 125, 143 

Bastian, 92 

Bayswater, 130 

Bentham, 186, 187, 191 

Bill of Rights, 3 

Birmingham, 200 

Bismarck, 49 

Blackstone, 149 

Board of Guardians, 29 

Board of Health, 123, 239 

Board of Public Works, 12 

Board of Trade, 13, 14, 98 

Bolingbroke, 3 

Book of Fallacies, 187 

Bossuet, 174 

Brewster, Sir David, 15 

Brighton, 131 

Building Acts, 166 

Burials Act, 9 

Canal-Boat Act, 10 
Carlyle, 134, 175 
Catholics, 4 
Census, 94 
Chancery, 124 
Charles II, 2 
Cheap Trains Act, 14 
Chester, 131 

Child labor legislation, 9, 10, 11, 12, 
13, 30 

Chimney-S weepers Act, 11 
Chippewayans, 190, 198 

Chisholm, Mrs., 148 
Cholesbury, 46 
Cobden Club, 107 
Coke, 149 
Colonial Office, 123 
Communism, 39, 50 
Compulsory cultivation, 45 
Compulsory Cultivation Bill, 44 
Compulsory vaccination, 11, 13, 45 
Constitutional Code, 186 
Contagious Diseases Act, 11 
Craik, G. L., 84 
Cross, Sir Richard, 97 
Croydon, 132 
Cumming, A. N., 108 

Dahome, 186 
Darwin, 110, 175 
Declaration of Independence, 66 
De Maupas, 51 

Democratic Federation, 39, 44, 45, 

46, 47, 50, 51, 85 
De Tocqueville, 84, 208 
Dissenters, 4 

Dissertation on Parties, 3 
Dublin Exhibition, 148 

East India Company, 4 
Edinburgh, 96 
Edinburgh Review, 179 
Education, 10, 11, 12, 13, 15, 16, 29, 

37, 55, 68, 143 
Education Department, 12 
Edward III, 10, 85 
Edward VI, 9 
Emerson, 110 

Factories Act, 10 

Factories and Workshops Act, 12, 
13, 14 

Factory Pedlars Act, 13 

211 

212 

INDEX 

Fairman, Frank, 53 
Family Colonization Loan Society, 
148 

Farrer, Sir Thomas, 31, 96 
Forrest, C, 90 

France, 36, 158, 159, 169, 202 
Free libraries, 12, 15, 24, 27, 40 
Free Libraries Act, 40 
Free Trade, 107, 114 
French Revolution, 7, 32, 41, 45, 66, 
208 

George, Henry, 116 
Gladstone, 12, 98 
Glasgow, 92, 93 
Green, 3 
Grey, Lord, 43 
Guizot, 167 

Habeas Corpus Act, 3 
Hall, Sir B., 139 
Henry III, 86 
Henry VIII, 9 

Herbert Spencer on Socialism, 53 
Hobbes, 176, 177, 178, 186 
Holland, 169 

Housing, 13, 24, 26, 43, 44, 88, 89, 
90, 91, 92, 93, 130, 131, 132, 148, 
149, 166 

Hume, Deacon, 149 

Hyde Park, 153 

Hyndman, H. M., 39, 53, 116 

Incumbered Estates Act, 166 
Industrial Dwellings Act, 43 
Industrial regulation legislation, 10, 

11, 12, 14 
Ireland, 165 

Janson, F. H, 86, 95 
Jevons, Prof., 185 
Johnson, Dr., 147 
Joint Stock Companies Registra- 
tion Act, 132 
Journalism, 41 

Labor legislation, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 

14, 15, 30 
Lainz, 169 

Lambeth, 130 

Lancashire, 27, 200, 201 

Land nationalization, 39, 47 

Lecky, W. E. H., 84 

Leeds, 200 

Licensing Act, 13 

Lindsay, 144, 167 

Liverpool, 26, 157 

London, 140, 141, 148, 157, 169 

London Gazette, The, 139 

Louis XIV, 174 

Louis XV, 84 

Lyell, Sir Charles, 175 

Lyttelton, 98 

Maine, Sir Henry, 59 
Manchester, 27, 157 
Maule, Fox, 94 
May, Sir Erskine, 81 
Mercantile Marine Act, 132, 151 
Merchant Shipping Act, 12, 13 
Metropolitan Board of Works, 91 
Metropolitan Buildings' Act, 130, 
131 

Molesworth, Sir William, 131 
Morning Chronicle, 158 
Municipal Reform Bill, 4 
Municipal utilities, 13, 47 

Nazigation and Mercantile Marine 

Law, 167 
Navigation Laws, 151 
New Poor Law, 25 
Non-Resisting Test Bill, 3 
Nottingham Inclosure Act of 1845, 

132 

On the Value of Political Economy 

to Mankind, 108 
Open Court, The, 66 

Pall Mall Gazette, 38 
Palmerston, Lord, 10 
Passengers' Act, 132 
Patagonia, 197 
Peel, Sir Robert, 171 
Peru, 78, 186 
Pitt, 29 

Political Institutions, 76, 79 

INDEX 

213 

Pollock, Prof., 194 

Poor Law, 24, 25, 26, 27, 34, 46, 

113, 135 
Poor Law Commissioners, 97 
Poor relief, 24, 25, 26, 29, 113, 135 
Price fixing, 85 

Province of Jurisprudence, 178 
Public health, 12, 14, 97 
Public Health Act, 12 
Public Health Act of 1872, 95 
Public Libraries Act, 12 
Public Works Act, 11 

Quakers, 183 

Railway Commissioners, 14 
"Railway Morals and Railway 

Policy," 179 
Railway Winding-up Act, 164 
Ramsgate Harbor, 139 
Rate-fixing legislation, 11 
Rathbone, 94 
Reform Bill, 4, 89 
Regime of contract, 1, 193, 199, 200 
Regime of status, 1, 52, 193, 198, 

199 

Revolution, 2 

Robinson, Madame Fleury, 66 
Roman Government, 7, 8, 45 
Romilly, Sir John, 163 
Rousseau, 181 
Royal Exchange, 10 
Royal Society, 15 
Russell, Lord John, 12 
Russia, 36, 42, 169 

Sale of intoxicating liquors, 9, 11, 

12, 13, 34, 55, 135 
Sanitation, 11, 12, 33, 97 
School Boards, 29 
Schoolcraft, 198 
Sea-birds Preservation Act, 12 
Seed Supply (Ireland) Act, 9 
Serfdom, 42, 63, 76 
Severs Commission, 139 
Shipping laws, 10, 12, 13, 30, 31, 98, 

129, 130, 132, 135, 151 
Siemens, Sir Charles, 95 

Smith, William, 148 
Smithfield, 136 
Smoke-Bill, 141 

Social Statics, 53, 76, 88, 89, 98, 109 
Socialism and Slavery, 53 
South Wales, 200 
Spain, 28 

Spencer, The Rev. Thomas, 24 
Spitafields Acts, 10 
Staffordshire, 200 

State Charities Aid Association, 
110 

State in Relation to Labour, The, 
185 

State ownership of land and dwell- 
ings, 47 

State ownership of railways, 31, 33, 

46, 52, 70, 169 
State ownership of telegraphs, 12, 

33, 47, 70, 95 
Statute of Labourers, 85 
Statute of Merton, 86 
Study of Sociology, The, 76, 96, 98 
Sydenham, 153 

Taine, 45, 208 
Tasmania, 197 
Thiers, 202 
Times, The, 89, 98 
Trades-unions, 72, 74, 75 
Trades Unions Congress, 51 
Transient relief legislation, 12 

Unemployment, 22, 23, 25 
United States, 169 
Usury, 84 

Vignoles, C. B., 202 

Wage fixing, 85 

Wages- funds, 25, 26, 27, 28, 113 

Wallace, 36 

Wandsworth, 130 

Westminster, 99 

Whiggism, 2 

Whiston, 143 

Wood-Veddahs, 196, 198 

Young, Arthur, 84 

Date Due 

fc2 

i/VV> v 

' " r ■ 

FFR * ° 

1949 

 ^\ 

i 

JC571 .S74 1940 
The man versus the state. 

Princeton Theological Seminary-Spee"r U£*f 

1 1012 00140 7735
